ヒ、ヒトだ、珍しい… 	 Finlesss one, eh?
聞きたい、ことが… 	 I have a quessstion...
そろそろ、狩り、行かぬか？ 	 Are you just going to ssstand there all day!?
ヒトのお嬢が、潮溜まり、訪ねてくるなど…… 珍奇なことも、あったものよな！ 	 Such a rare and wonderful pleasure it is to receive a finless one. I do so hope you enjoy your time in the Cupsss.
潮なく、不安だ… 	 But it is ssso dry!
どうやら他の都市は、恐ろしい災害に見舞われているらしい。 想像を絶するような恐怖に出くわしたとき、 人は、どうなってしまうのだろうね？ 	 Have you heard about these calamities the other cities are facing? Terrifying concepts─the stuff of nightmares, running amok. What are the people to do?
本日はどのようなご用件でしょうか？ 弁論記録の登録、引き出し、弁論室の借用願いなど…… どうぞなんなりと、お申しつけください。 	 How may I help you, little one? Do you wish to peruse the transcripts of the great debates? Or would you like to reserve a room for a discussion? We are here to serve your needs.
おや、なんと可愛らしい子だ 	 What a precocious little child!
君も研究者を志しているのかな？ 思索に次ぐ思索、そして繰り返される考察と実証が、 新たな創造魔法を生み出すだろう。 - 僕も当代のラハブレアのような、創造者になりたいものだ。 既存の創造魔法をことごとく理解したがゆえに生み出される、 斬新かつ美しい幻想生物たるや、筆舌に尽くしがたいね！ 	 An aspiring researcher, I take it? It may seem like a rather complicated pursuit at your age, but I assure you it is simply a matter of adhering to the tried-and-true methods of observation, supposition, and experimentation. - With time and effort, I hope to become a creator to rival Lahabrea. A master of every recognized creation magick, possessed of boundless imagination and willpower to realize impossibly complex concepts. And a renowned orator besides!
君の話は いつも面白いな 	 Yes, yes. Quite right...
君はもしかして… いや、なんでもない 	 You... I know... No, never mind.
あの研究対象の魅力は… 	 The subject's potential is far beyond our wildest expectations...
潮なき今、 ヒトの狩り、教え乞いたいものよ。 我らオンド、陸での狩り、慣れていないからな。 	 We would be grateful for any knowledge of hunting you can shhhare. Perhaps the others have told you already, but we are unaccussstomed to dissspatching prey on dry land.
潮、なくとも、我らの生活、変わらぬ。 いにしえの者、信仰し、遺構と潮溜まり、守りながら、 慎ましく、海底で暮らす。 	 The others may claim the withdrawing of the waters changes everything, but I do not think so. For generations have we guarded these ruins we call home, and we shall continue to do so for generations to come.
創造理論について ご教授願えますか？ 	 If you could perhaps explain the finer points of the creation process...
これで私たちも アーモロート市民ね 	 Citizens must be held to a higher standard...
なにか素敵なイデアをご存知？ 	 There's an incredible concept I just know you'll adore...
