お母さん… この日が来たのね！ 	 You'll see, Mother. You'll see.
みんな再出発か… 	 Hope it's not like last time...
竜はまだかなぁ？ 	 When's the dragon going to come?
なんだ、ここは何の場所かだと？ 皇都につながる空路用の発着口だ。 付近の空を自在に飛べるなら、使うがいい。 	 Aye, this is indeed an airship landing, though it doesn't get all that much use. If you've got your own black chocobo or some other means of airborne conveyance, then you may feel free to use it to return to Ishgard.
……あっ、はいっ……私は文官をしています……。 ごちゃごちゃになっている霊災前の駐屯部隊の資料を、 つなぎあわせて編集して、整理しています……。 	 Oh, you are speaking to me? Sorry, I spend so much time alone with these old papers... Really, I do wish the soldiers had done a better job of organizing their records before the Calamity.
……ん、空を見上げて何してるのかって？ 俺の本職は鷹匠でね……。 偵察に出した鷹たちの帰りを待ってるのさ。 	 Hm? Isn't it obvious? I'm watching for my birds. What better vantage point from which to spy our enemies than the sky?
霊災からこっち、環境が激変しちまったせいで、 各地の調査や観測で大忙しだぜ……。 まあ、仕事にありつけてるだけ、俺は幸せだがね。 	 Ever since the Calamity wreaked havoc on the climate, there's been no end to the surveying. Though the work runs me ragged, I give thanks that I have work at all.
……この石像は、 イシュガルドの建国の英雄にして、史上初の「蒼の竜騎士」…… ハルドラス様を象ったものなのです。 	 Beautiful, isn't it? The spitting image of Haldrath, first of the Azure Dragoons and one of Ishgard's founding fathers...
今日も、目立った異常はないようだ……。 イシュガルドの民が危険にさらされぬよう、 この監視塔の上から見張っているのだ。 	 Nothing out of the ordinary so far...but who can say what the morning will bring.
大氷壁を超えれば、クルザス中央高地に出ますが…… 氷壁内部は崩落の危険がありまして。 現在、調査員以外の立ち入りを禁じております。 	 One could conceivably pass through Snowcloak and exit somewhere in the central highlands...assuming that the tunnels did not collapse upon one's head. As unstable as the Warrens are, however, entry into the ice wall has been restricted to all but authorized surveyors.
異端者どもが、まだ大氷壁内に潜んでおるのですよ。 そのせいで調査もうまく進まず……難儀なもんです。 	 By now, the Warrens of Snowcloak should have been fully explored, but the tunnels yet harbor a tenacious nest of heretics. Progress has been painfully slow...
俺たちがドラゴン族を狩る目的はひとつ……出世さ。 武勲を立てることで、くだらねえ下級貴族の身分を抜けだす。 - そういう意味じゃ、ジャントゥローは最高のリーダーさ。 なんせ、誰よりも出世したがってるのは奴だからな……。 	 We Convictors are all here for the same reason─to try to prove ourselves and move up in the world. The best way to do that is with an impressive feat of combat. - Jantellot may not be a master of spearmanship, but he's a great leader. It's ambition that counts, and nobody here wants to prove themselves to the realm more than he does.
ドラゴン族の討伐も重要だが、 戦いの最中に命を落とした、多くの兵たちがいる……。 彼らへの弔いも、決して忘れてはならぬのだよ。 	 Honor, glory─men seek these things in battle. Alas, all too often, they find something else entirely.
早く狩りて～ぜ！ 	 Cut my hand with this damned knife. Captain says no hunting till it heals.
……ふん、こんなオンボロ波止場を訪ねる奴がいるとはな。 生憎だが、お前の興味をひくようなものは何もないぞ。 	 Off with you! I've neither the time nor the inclination to entertain travelers. There's work to be done and hardly any time to do it.
私は、異端者がらみの件で、 レッドワルド卿の手伝いをすることになった。 そちらの件は、任せたぞ。 	 Ser Redwald and I are discussing how to deal with the heretics in this region. In the meantime, I ask that you see to other matters.
くっ…！ 	 Bollocks...
油断したぜ… 	 How could such a wee thing be so strong!?
くそっ、こんな小娘に… 	 Tossed us about like a rag doll, she did!
あの…すいません… 	 May I have a moment?
…何用だ 	 Make it quick.
私はここで、ダスクヴィジルの警護にあたっている。 もっとも、今となっては既に廃墟と化しているが……。 異端者の根城とならぬよう、監視が必要なのだ。 	 Wild beasts within, heretics without... Suffice it to say, we've many a reason to see that nothing and no one passes through the gates.
さ、寒い… だれか開けてくれ… 	 Open this door or I'll... Or I'll... Gah! Just open it!
あれ？ あいつどこ行った？ 	 'Tweren't for these goggles, our eyes'd freeze solid! I've seen it happen!
採掘地への最短ルートは… 	 What's the shortest way back, I wonder?
滑落に注意しろ！ 	 Keep an eye out for falling rocks!
試掘も大変そうだ 	 Prospecting looks a right chore.
くっ…！ 	 Ugh...
ありがとう…！ 	 My thanks...
死んでたまるか！ 	 You're mine!
助かった 	 That was close...
ドラゴン族め… 	 Have at you!
こんなところで…！ 	 Damn their thick hides!
くそぉぉ！ 	 Yaaargh!
ドラゴン族を 軽視するのか！？ 	 Heretics! Someone call the guard!
役立たずの占星術師め！ 	 Take your fortune- telling elsewhere!
ここはもっと強化が必要だ 	 We'll need six score nails, ten score lengths of ash... Are you getting all this?
さっさとしろ！ 親方に怒られるぞ！ 	 Don't tell me it's frozen to the cobbles. I'm not falling for that one again!
ここもか… 修復した方がいいな 	 I have no idea how I'm going to get down...
異端者の動きが… 	 The colder it grows, the bolder the heretics become.
危険な道のりだが 気を付けていくぞ！ 	 If I lose another 'bo to those yetis, I'll be ruined.
ここを越えれば ドラヴァニアだ！ 	 Just a few more malms...
異常な～し！ 	 I think I see a mountain!
開催が待ち遠しいわねぇ 	 But what if the baby comes early?
どんな式典になるのかな 	 What I wouldn't give to look behind the curtain.
Ｚｚｚ… 	 Zzz...
…………ぐぅ… 	 Zzz... <snort>
