ここの支配人らしいよ… 	 Rumor is it's anatomically correct.
金ピカだね… 	 That's quite the statue...
こちらはレース場へと通じる扉でございます。 許可なき立ち入りは、ご遠慮くださいませ。 	 This passage leads to the chocobo racing course. Unauthorized entrance is strictly prohibited.
レースの準備が整いましたら、 わたくしどもが、きっちりご案内しますので、 出走の際は、チョコボスクウェア内でお待ちくださいませ。 	 When post time draws near, we will provide further instructions. If you are looking to enter a race, please wait patiently within the halls of Chocobo Square.
いつかレースに出ようね 	 Old enough to waddle, old enough to race.
やぁ、これは美しいお嬢さんだ。 ここにいるということは、君もレースに出走するのかな？ ……ふっ、君とはいい勝負ができそうな気がするよ！ 	 Hey, name's Joe. Nice to meet... Wait, we met before? No...maybe not. Hmmm... I can tell you've got a story...and I reckon it's pretty interesting. Aye, I have a feeling that we'll meet again. Then, until we meet again.
出走時間はまだかな… 	 I wonder if I have time for a swing at Cuff-a-Cur before the next race...
ボコ、いいのか！？ 	 It's alright, Boko. The people here will take good care of you.
まだ早いんじゃない？ 	 No wonder there are so many chicken dishes!
仕上がりはバッチリだ！ 	 I heard the Saucer's kitchens claim all abandoned chocobos.
これは、様！ 競走羽の調子は上々ですかな？ 私も遠くからレースを眺めては、心を熱くさせていますよ！ 	 Ho, friend! I trust your bird fares well? Ah, but the races are ever a sight to behold!
ここはゴールドソーサー。 すべての人が、うたかたの夢を見る場所でございます！ 	 Here at the Gold Saucer, we strive to make all your dreams come true─even the dreams you never knew you had! Tee hee!
ゴールドソーサーへようこそ。 あなたも、ステキな夢の世界を楽しんでね！ 	 Welcome to the Gold Saucer, honored guest. There's no end to the wonders within these halls─pray don't be shy about partaking in them!
あなたは、どんな施設で遊ぶつもり！？ チョコボレースもトリプルトライアドも楽しくて…… もう、選べなくて迷っちゃうわ～！ 	 Oh, what should I do next? Enter a chocobo race or play Triple Triad? Or do something else altogether!? For the life of me, I can't decide!
ふむ、筋がいい… 	 The stroke... The follow- through... That boy truly knows how to handle a ball...
向こうにある扉が見えるかしら。 あの扉の先では、競走羽の調教を行っているわ。 調教しながら、レースの様子を眺めるのが、私の楽しみなの！ 	 Beyond those doors is where we train race chocobos. Mayhap you prefer the raw excitement of a race, though? Believe me, there is much joy in watching the fledglings grow stronger and predicting how well they will perform.
ゴールドソーサーへようこそ！ 	 Welcome to the Manderville Gold Saucer!
楽しんでいってね！ 	 Escape reality, live the fantasy!
俺の競走羽が勝つために… 	 I'll never best that Teioh!
よう、一見さんかい？ それとも常連さんかな……？ どっちにしても、たくさん遊んでってくれよ！ 	 Newcomer or veteran, the Gold Saucer has something for everyone. Why not cast your worries aside for the day and delight in the myriad diversions we have to offer?
おっきい像だなぁ！ 	 Everything in this place is so massive! I wonder if the owner is attempting to compensate for something.
今日は何で遊ぼうか… 	 Pipe down, boy. Can't ye see I'm thinkin'?
今日こそ当ててやる！ 	 Today's my lucky day! Or perhaps tomorrow!
お姉さん、「トリプルトライアド」は好きですか？ 僕はカードが大好きで、いろんな人と対戦しているうちに、 いつの間にか、「キング」なんて呼ばれるようになっちゃって。 - その名に恥じないように、がんばりますから、 もし戦うことがあったら、よろしくお願いします！ 	 Fond of Triple Triad, are you? I can't play enough of the game myself. I've defeated so many opponents now, they started calling me “King.” - And I must say, I've grown rather attached to the title. If you mean to topple me from my throne, then you'd best prepare yourself for a royal rumble!
…………最初に言っておくけど、僕は強いよ。 君も「トリプルトライアド」をやるのなら、 それなりの腕を身につけてから、僕に挑むことだ。 - それまでは、あっちの「スペード」とでも戦って、 修行を積むんだね……。 	 ...Stop. Before you utter a word, know that you address a Triple Triad champion. If you intend to challenge me, then pray do so only once your skills have reached their peak. - Until then, mayhap Jonas of the Three Spades would provide you with a less...daunting adversary.
ハ～イ！　あなた、いい顔してるじゃない。 あなたとなら、気持ちいいバトルができそうだわ！ もちろん、勝つのは私だけどね！ 	 Well, now, ain't ye a pretty one! I'll have me summat nice to look at while I'm takin' ye apart at the card table!
おっしゃあ、今日もガンガン絶好調！ あんた、俺と戦うときは覚悟しろよ？ 俺、手加減とかはできねえ性格だからさ！ 	 Ah, the cards are in my favor today! You'd best bring your finest decks against me, friend, because I am ON FIRE!
君も「トリプルトライアド」をやるのかい？ 僕は「ダイヤ」の異名で呼ばれる者さ……。 一応、それなりの実力はあるつもりだよ。 - 対戦することになったら、全力で挑んでくるといい。 もちろん、僕も本気で臨ませてもらうよ！ 	 Fancy yourself a Triple Triad player, do you? I've built a fair reputation at the game myself─enough to earn a place in the Gold Saucer “court,” at any rate. - So, you see, there's no need to take it easy on me...as I certainly won't be easy on you!
油断は禁物ね 	 Knavery is unnecessary when matching wits with the likes of you.
まだ逆転可能よ…！ 	 Them some right baggin' sleeves you 'ave there.
俺たちの女神の勝利だ！ 	 You going to let her take your money like that?
ねえ、早く行こうよー！ 	 Da! I'm hungry and I miss Ma and Sis!
あのモーグリ可愛い… 	 Can someone─anyone─ show me to the privy? I'm like to explode!
一緒にまわろうよー 	 “El Coloso” means “the Coloso.”
えー、どうしようかなー 	 <swoon> You know everything!
おかしいなあ……。 ワンダースクウェアで待ち合わせって言ったんだけど、 彼女が全然来ないんだ……。 	 My companion promised to meet me in Wonder Square, but she's nowhere to be seen! Do you think it's this fragrance I'm wearing? She's always had a most sensitive nose...
ワンダースクウェアで待ち合わせって、約束したのに…… 初デートで、女の子を待たせるなんてサイテー！ ほんとに失礼しちゃうわ！ 	 My companion promised to meet me in Wonder Square, but I can't find him anywhere! Do you think it's my dress? He's so particular when it comes to fashion...
ちょっと一休み… 	 This seat is taken, if you were wondering.
これ登りたいー！ 	 What exactly were we looking for again, Father?
あら、くじを買いにきたの？ それとも……私に会いに来てくれたのかしら？ な～んて、もしそうなら嬉しいけどね！ 	 Hello, cutie. Come for the Cactpot...or for me? Either way, you're more than welcome to test your luck. Tee hee!
釣れないなぁ… 	 That sabotender told me there was fish in here!
きっついわ、これ… 	 How's about another go at her, eh?
お人形、かわいいな～ 	 A little more to the left... Now up! No, back! Right! Stop! Stop! Stop!
頂上まで、もう少しよ！ 	 I can see the top!
つ、ついに当たったー！ 	 Cactpot! I'm rich! I'm rich!
何して遊ぼうかー？ 	 No pets allowed, my arse.
あんた、この水の中に入ってみたか！？ 騙されたと思って、足突っこんでみなよ。 マジで、すげーから！！ 	 If you've not yet done so, you must try wading in the water here. It's remarkably refreshing!
なんで、インプが…？ 	 Where am I? I just want to go home...
次こそ当たる気がする… 	 My lucky numbers? Why, 1234, of course!
愛してるよ、ハニー… 	 Close your eyes, darling. They cannot see you if you cannot see them.
ここじゃ恥ずかしいわ… 	 Why is everyone staring at us, Bradford?
今週の購入者ボーナスは… 	 You mean waiting here won't see the drawing any earlier!?
先週の当選番号は… 	 And by “approximately” you mean “exactly,” right?
最近の傾向として… 	 By my calculations, you have approximately a 1 in 10,000 chance of winning.
……あら、わたくしに何かご用かしら？ うふふ、次は何で遊ぼうか考えていたところですの。 - どんな遊戯だって、かならず遊び尽くしてみせますわ。 いつも新しいものには、何だって挑戦してみたくなるのだもの。 この遊技場がわたくしを、ずっと飽きさせないと良いのですけど！  	 <yawn> All these bright lights and loud noises. I find it all so dreadfully...tedious. Or perhaps you've come to amuse me? - ...No? Then go off and play your silly games, or whatever it is you've come to do. <sigh>
星神ニメーヤ様の 祝福がありますように… 	 A kiss for good luck? That'll be 50 MGP.
これは、様！ こちらは、憩いの場「ラウンジ・マンダヴィル」です。 ごゆるりとお過ごしください！ 	 Welcome, honored guest, to the Manderville Lounge. On behalf of Master Godbert, we shall do all in our power to see that your stay is a pleasant one.
聞いてくれよ… 	 That uniform serves only to objectify and is an insult to her inner beauty!
飲みすぎですよ？ 	 Any complaints regarding staff attire can be taken up with the management.
これは、様！ 「トリプルトライアド」は、当遊技場でも大人気でして。 最近では、様々な方が遊んでらっしゃるようですよ！ 	 The Triple Triad tables are bustling with excitement as ever, no? I can scarcely wait to see who will claim victory in the next tournament!
これは、様！ ここのイベントは、私も大好きでしてねえ……。 ぜひ、ステージに上がってみてくださいね！ 	 So we meet again...and you could not have picked a better time to come! This event is one of my personal favorites─I heartily encourage you to take your place on stage!
ようこそ、「ミニオンスクウェア」へ！ こちらではミニオンを使った遊技、 「ロード・オブ・ヴァーミニオン（LoVM）」を楽しめます！ - 遊ぶ際は、設置されている「LoVM」からどうぞ。 ルールを確認することもできるので、 初めての方もご安心ください！ - なお、ミニオンをお求めでしたら「ミニオントレーダー」を。 大会にエントリーされる際は「大会受付窓口」を、 それぞれ、お尋ねくださいませ！ 	 Greetings, and welcome to Minion Square! If you've a stalwart stable of mighty minions, then Lord of Verminion is the game for you! - Feel free to test your tactical talents at any of the tables available. Every gaming station has a rule book on hand, so newcomers can study up before they throw down! - Should your forces feel feeble, our minion trader stands ready to provide fresh fodder for the field. And if the intensity of tournaments tickles your fancy, the recordkeeper to my left will sign you up with a swiftness.
うーん、なかなか上位に入れないわね。 かわいいミニオンを使って、相手をメロメロにする作戦…… 考えなおした方がいいかしら……。 	 Hmmm, I just can't seem to make it into the top ten. Mayhap I should select my minions by their merit, rather than their adorability...
戦いは数だ！ 物量で一気にいくぜ！ 	 Overwhelming numbers! That's the best strategy!
もう少し、引きつけてから… うふふ…♪ 	 I'll let him think he's winning... Then BAM! Hee hee!
性格が出るなぁ… 	 She's usually such a sweet girl...
正面奥に進みますと「チョコボレースカウンター」。 右手に曲がりますと「LoVMカウンター」がございます。 	 Continue straight ahead to register your chocobo at the race counter. The Lord of Verminion tables can be found to the right.
これは、様！ ミニオンたちの準備は万端ですかな？ 躍動するミニオンの勇姿……ぜひ、ご堪能ください！ 	 Ah, Lady ! Your minion army is in good trim, I trust? I, for one, would not wish to contend with a seasoned adventurer, no matter the field of battle!
くくく…！ 	 Hee hee hee!
そういえば、森でさまよっていた時、 白くて、フワフワした、空飛ぶビーバーみたいなのと、 出会ったのですが、あれも妖怪なんでしょうか？ 	 When I was lost in those deep woods, I met a fluffy little creature who was white as snow and floated through the air like a cloud, only to vanish before my eyes. Could it be that I had my first encounter with an Eorzean Yo-kai?
爆弾にやられましたね～ 	 Oh, Inspector! Are you hurt!? Maybe you should hibernate a bit longer.
なぜワシの名前がないのだ！ 	 I shall see that someone pays for this! Why is my name not on here!?
オレ様の騎乗術を 見せてやるぜ！ 	 Watch well, Honoroit—you may learn a thing or two!
き、危険ですから おやめください！ 	 My lord, please stop this before you hurt yourself!
ここで一発当てて 財政再建でっす！ 	 One good ticket—that's all I need!
局長のもなかなか 可愛くてよ？ 	 Get ready for a Raubahn roasting!
提督のマメットが最強だぜ！ 	 I'll have ye know the Admiral's no slouch!
ア・ルン様の マメットはないのか？ 	 I cannot help but feel at a disadvantage here...
イカサマしてる悪い子は いないかしら… 	 Anyone here caught cheating answers to me, understand?
つ、次こそは… 一攫千金でっす 	 Next time. Next time I'll hit the cactpot.
プレゼントにまっしぐら すごいです～ 	 A present? But it's not even my nameday!
いや、チョコボレースで勝負だ！ 	 Hells take your cards! I say we race chocobos!
トリプルトライアドで勝負だ 	 We should play Triple Triad!
しゅ～ 煌びやかな趣向じゃのう 	 Don't be such a ssspoilsport.
警備隊の慰安といっても 羽目を外しすぎるなよ 	 Don't stray too far, got that? I promised to keep an eye on you.
オレの勝負運を 見せてやるぜ！ 	 I will have that bunny suit!
そうか？ 気のせいだろう 	 'Tis your mind playing tricks on you. Nothing more.
あの人… 見覚えがあるような…？ 	 I swear I've seen him somewhere before...
バニーちゃんは登らんのか？ 	 You ladies head up first. I'll take the rear...
つい採掘したくなる山ね… 	 You'll take my pickaxe to the eye should you try anything.
大金持ちへの道は険しいのねん… 	 The path to riches is a perilous one, yes, yes...
ん～もう！ 目のやり場に困るわ… 	 Seven hells! Get a bloody room, will ye!?
次は俺が勝ってやるかんね！ 	 The next match is mine!
何度やっても僕には敵わんよ！ 	 Mewling cub! You'll never defeat me!
オレのハンマーさばきを見やがれ！ 	 I'll show ye how to swing a damn hammer!
私が負けてしまうとは… 	 The abyss take me...
は、牌を捨てるときは きれいに並べてっと… 	 Wh-Which tile should I discard...?
ちっくしょう、勝てねえよぉ…！ 	 Well, this is a disaster!
ふゥん、これに登れとねぇ？ 	 And one is meant to scale this edifice...?
次は何をやろうか… 	 Hmm, what should I do now...?
広いなぁ！ 	 <gasp> The size of this place!
楽しみだわ！ 	 Where shall we start!?
あと1回だけ…！ 	 Just one more try...
いつまでやるの！？ 	 What, again!?
次は当てて見せるわよ…！ 	 The next big win is mine, I can feel it!
暁デッキで 目指せ1位でっす！ 	 My “Dawn Deck” will be unstoppable!
日頃のうっぷんを晴らすわ… 	 Prepare to feel my fist of rage!
ウララったら… 	 Oh, calm down, Ulala...
バデロンは 顔に出やすいから… 	 You've the worst mahjong face, my friend...
ほう、こいつは面白い… 	 Aye, now this is interestin'...
むほ～、たまらんぞい！ 	 Why, the Gold Saucer's every bit as wonderful as I imagined─more so, even!
ちゃりちゃり、集めるっちゃ！ 	 Sparklies! So many sparklies!
い、いや、その… 	 H-How many times do I have to tell ye!? I'm not bloody interested!
最高のもてなしぢゃ！ 	 Such hospitality! A man could get used to this!
ちゃりちゃり どこでもらえるっちゃ？ 	 Kyokyoroon came for sparklies. Where are sparklies?
デートスポットを お探しなんですね！？ 	 Do allow me to guide you to the perfect spot to visit with your special someone.
ここにも、おいしそうな プディングが…！？ 	 I wonder what varieties of pudding they serve in this place?
モグたちを キャッチするクポ！？ 	 Can you catch us, kupo?
酒でも飲まなきゃ やってらンねえぜ… 	 So long as there's drink, I can manage...
一攫千金 これもまたラブ＆ドリーム… 	 One moment poor as a pauper, the next rich as a king! Ah, what a magical place!
景品のリストを載せたら 読者の興味を引けるかな… 	 My readers would be very interested to know what items are on offer.
セニョール・サボテンダーも 負けてられないな…！ 	 These imps don't hold a candle to Senor Sabotender...!
ゴールドソーサーが妙なことになってるって聞いて、 取材に来たんだけど……。 この状況、どうまとめようかしらね。 	 When I heard that the Gold Saucer took a new approach to their annual celebration, I thought it best to report my findings and write something up before my rivals had the chance, but now that I've seen it for myself, I'm not quite sure where to begin...
なんと、このような場で貴殿と顔を合わすとは……！ 西方の遊技場で「かっぱ」なる存在が現れたと、 どこからかヒエン様のお耳に届いてな。 - 噂を聞くほどに興味が深まっていったらしく、 落ち着かない様子だったので、やむなく私が参じたのだ。 お忙しいあの方に代わり、見聞をお伝えするために……。 - そしてつい先ほど、筋骨隆々なかっぱに勧められ、 この衣装を貰い受けたところだ。 ……この姿を見せて、ヒエン様はお喜びになるだろうか？ 	 ! Glad am I to find a familiar face among these halls. I am come on behalf of Lord Hien to investigate the creatures you know as water imps. In the Far East, we call them kappa, and they oft appear in our myths. - My lord was unusually intrigued by reports of the imps' appearance, and would not rest until he learned more of this phenomenon. Yet his position allows him little time for such trivial matters, and thus did I travel here in his stead. - Know you of the muscular imp that roams the Saucer? 'Twas no sooner after I arrived that he bestowed upon me this suit of attire. Perhaps I shall wear it again upon my return to Doma─my lord was eager to see these living legends up close.
カッパちゃんって、とても不思議な見た目をしているのね。 私の夢に、この子たちが出てくれば、 エッグハントにもお招きできるのに！ - エッグハントでも、時折おかしなことを言うウサギを見かけるの。 ぜひ、カッパちゃんたちとお喋りしてほしいわ。 	 Such intriguing creatures, these water imps. If I am ever fortunate enough to dream of them, I would invite them to our Hatching–tide festivities without delay. - Perhaps one day, they might even decipher our language and speak with us more candidly... I once welcomed a curious talking rabbit to our celebrations, and I would welcome talking imps with equal enthusiasm!
ランカーなど全員 ワシがひとひねりじゃ！ 	 Prepare yourselves one and all for a thorough drubbing!
旦那が気炎を上げるとは… 珍しいこともあるもんだ 	 Unusual to see you so animated, sir.
セニョール・サボテンダーか… どんな生態なのかしら？ 	 I wonder what sort of habitat Senor Sabotender prefers.
あれは着ぐるみですよ… 	 I think you'll find it's an employee in costume, Professor...
あそこで待つのは強敵… だけど勝つのはアタシだ！ 	 There sits the king. He better be ready for a good thrashin'!
勝ったら　かわいい 景品いっぱい　ほしいゴブ！ 	 Great treasures and much jinglyshine await!
いま、エルマーさんの子ども教室について、 この子たちに説明をしていたんです。 おかげさまで大盛況ですよ。 - きっとこの子たちも、エルマーさんのように真似をして、 戦術を分析することで、強くなっていくのでしょう。 そう考えると、とてもおもしろいですね！ 	 The interest in King Elmer's Triple Triad classes has been positively overwhelming! I've just been providing these two youngsters with a brief explanation. - Who knows, perhaps they'll prove themselves master strategists and go on to become future champions!
あんなに強いのに 不正が見つからないぞ！ 	 So formidable, yet no discernable signs of naughtiness!
マウント・コイル登頂… タコタン討伐より楽勝だったぜ 	 Mt. Corel? More like Mound Corel! Gettin' up was even easier than beatin' ol Tidus.
サボテンダーが大きすぎて 私、ドン引きでございます 	 This gargantuan sabotender is most unsettling.
この大舞台で ホムンクルスに演奏を… 	 A stage fit for the Homunculi...
どこ行ってたの、お母さん！ 	 Where'd you go, Mummy!?
この子ったら… 見つかってよかったわ 	 You poor thing... Mummy's so sorry!
再会のお手伝いができて 私も嬉しいです 	 I'm just glad you're reunited.
お前さんは、何を遊びに来たんだ？ 俺はもちろん、トリプルトライアドよ！ ここに来たからには、キングのエルマーに挑戦しなきゃな！ 	 What brings you to the Gold Saucer? Personally, I'm a Triple Triad man, through and through. I've set my sights on beating King Elmer III!
