次の戦いは長そうだ… 	 I'm thinkin' of layin' down me sword after this next one.
お肌っゃっゃにゃ！ 	 Care to join us?
うう…のぼせちゃった… 	 My brain... I think I boiled it.
ぶくぶくぶく… 	 If the water were any deeper, I'd drown!
せっかくだし、入ってく？ 	 Can I interest you ladies in a midnight dip?
頭が…くらくら… 	 It appears we've been discovered, ladies.
…待ってる 	 Then so shall I.
長期療養かい？ 	 The springs'll warm from without, the wine within.
早く復帰したいぜ 	 Another word about my hair, Midlander, and I'll scalp you right here.
ゲゲルン、メメルンとお仕事っちゃ。 だから、ゲゲルン、仕事がいっぱいっちゃ。 ちゃりちゃりたっぷりお小遣い、ゲゲルン稼ぐっちゃ。 	 Gegeroon work for Memeroon. Always many, many works. Gegeroon make many, many shinies!
おや、こんなところに来客とは珍しいね。 「プアメイドミル」の方で、危険はなかったかい？ 元は木こりたちが暮らす集落だったんだがね。 - 魔物に襲われて亡くなる木こりが多く、 村には、貧しい未亡人ばかりが残るもんで、 「貧乏女の製材所」なんて不吉な地名がついたのさ。 	 I haven't had many visitors out here of late. Did you come to danger near Poor Maid's Mill? An unfortunate name for an unfortunate place, that. - It was once a lively hub for loggers, till they were all killed off by wild beasts. Only their impoverished widows were left behind. Not quite sure why they came to be called maids, though...
ふぃー、ここでゆっくり湯治をしてると、 コボルド族との死闘を忘れちゃいそうになるよ。 体も気持ちも、鈍らないようにしなきゃ。 	 I fear that convalescence has blunted my mind even as it knits together my wounded body. I know myself to be fortunate, for I have met others here who see kobolds around every corner, but I must not forget that my war goes on. 
ウォームワイン・サナトリウムへようこそ！ 香辛料などが入った温かいスパイスワインを飲んで、 戦傷を癒していきませんか？ 	 Welcome to the Warmwine Sanitorium. Here, we treat the wounded from the front with healing waters from the very womb of the earth, and heated wine redolent with spices.
カルテノーの戦いでは黒渦団の兵士として、 命を懸けて帝国兵に立ち向かったのよ！ 当時の傷はまだ癒えないけど、命があるだけマシだわね。 	 Remember Carteneau, I say! I was there under the Maelstrom standard and for every drop of my blood, the Garleans paid double! The Twelve willing, I'll fight again, and if I fall? Why, I'll see my comrades from the Flats again!
魔導アーマーの砲撃の音……。 未だにそれを思い出すと、震えが止まらないわ。 温泉で温まった体も、一気に冷えきってしまうの。 	 That...that boom of the magitek armor. Can't stop hearing it...see how my hand shakes so? Used to be that I'd pinch myself on my face, for sure and certain. Least I'm clear of that.
あーいだだだだだ！！ くっそぉ、俺の肉体に傷をつけた帝国兵の顔、 ぜってーに忘れねぇからな！！ 	 That smarts! The Twelve spit in my eye if I lie, that smarts like Ifrit himself skewered me with a stick of how-do-ye-do! I'd like to git me hands on that Garlean what mistook me for his pincushion...
フフンフフンフンフ～ン♪ あ～、丁度いい湯加減だわ～。 	 Tra-la-la, I do believe this is just right! Not too hot, not too cold.
私はまだ、調査が残っているの。 「リムサ・ロミンサ」の「ル・アシャ大甲佐」へ、 タイタン討伐の報告を、お願いできるかしら？ 	 I yet have matters that bear investigation. Pray return to Limsa Lominsa and report the defeat of Titan to Commander R'ashaht Rhiki.
ともに戦いましょう！ エオルゼアのために！ 	 We fight as one! For all Eorzeans!
