おいでませ！ 火傷によし、切り傷によし、皮膚の病によし！ 海を望む温泉が自慢の宿、「望海楼」へようこそ！ 	 Come one, come all! Burns, cuts, embarrassing rashes─there is naught that the mystical waters of the Bokaisen Hot Springs cannot heal!
小金通りへようこそ。 ひんがしの国の品から、舶来品まで、 あらゆるものを取り揃えております。 	 I bid you welcome to Kogane Dori. Be it goods from near or far, all can be obtained here. For the right price, of course.
海がこんなに近いのに、 事務仕事ばっかりっていうのも、気が滅入ります。 私も、釣りに行きたいです！ 	 How am I supposed to concentrate on my duties with the sea taunting me like this? My hand itches for a fishing rod, it does...
ここ転魂塔広場は、クガネの中でも、特に人通りが多い。 よそから来た無法者や不逞浪士がおらぬか、目を光らせておる。 困りごと、いさかいを見かけたら、声をかけよ。 	 Tenkonto is as the crossroads of Kugane─many people pass through it every day, and I have learned to recognize the lawbreaker and the troublemaker. Conduct yourself with respect, and we shall have no quarrel.
いらっしゃいませ。 クガネ名物などを堪能して、旅の疲れを癒し、 次なる旅への英気を養ってください。 	 Welcome to the Shiokaze Hostelry. Should you wish to sample the flavors of Kugane, or simply to rest and recover from the rigors of your travels, we stand ready to meet your every need.
この壺…もしやあの名品… 	 Where did you find that amazing earthenware? Might you be interested in selling?
若女形の顔見世公演だよ～ 見てってくんな～ 	 Come inside, traveler! We've dancers of all shapes and sizes!
え～！ 私、見てみた～い！ 	 What is this I hear of you bathing with the locals!?
うちの旦那は働きもせず 三条花街に入り浸ってて… 	 My good-for-nothing husband spends morning and night under Sanjo's red lamps, the lech!
この広場は、松葉門外広場という。 初代クガネ奉行「マツバ家」の屋敷が、 この先にあったことが由来だ。 	 This is Matsuba Square, and there is great history here. It takes its name from Clan Matsuba, one of the first lines of magistrates in Kugane.
これより先は、クガネ奉行の許可なくして、 立ち入ることはまかりならん。 即刻、立ち去られよ。 	 No one may pass these gates without the express permission of the magistrate. Be on your way.
おい、それ以上近寄るな、蛮人め……。 	 That's close enough, savage.
ここはラザハンの大使館です。 用件のない方はお引き取り願います。 	 Yes, this is the Thavnairian Consulate. No, you may not enter without official business.
もう「望海泉」自慢の湯には浸かったか？ もののついでに、ひとっ風呂浴びて、 サッパリしていったらどうじゃ？ 	 Have you been for a soak in the soothing waters of Bokaisen Hot Springs? Take the time, and you will not be sorry. My baths will cure all what ails you.
いや～ちょいとノボセちまいましてね。 涼んだら、また湯に浸かりますよ。 	 ...Phew, felt the blood rushing to my head for a moment there. I'll hop back in once I've cooled down...
湯に浸かりながら、紅玉の海原を見やる……。 心まで、洗われますな。 	 There is nothing finer than soaking in a hot spring whilst letting one's mind drift out across the Ruby Sea...
あれ……俺の着替えは……？ いい湯に浸かって、日頃の垢を流したら、 いろんな記憶まで流しちまったか…… 	 (...Stupid sexy Roegadyn...)
酒というのは、奥が深くてのう……。 産地、銘柄が異なれば、味も香りもまったく異なる。 すべてを味わいつくすのが、我が野望よ……。 	 Sake seems a simple drink, but depending on the place it was made and the hand which made it, the flavor is subtly different. I shall have to sample them all...
おお、異国の者、わしと酒を酌み交わさんか？ ちょうど、旅の話を肴にしたかったところでな。 	 Ah, an ijin! Come...come sit with me and have a drink. I would hear the fan...hic...the fantastic tales of your travels!
御船蔵 (おふなくら)に何か用かい？ ここじゃ、主に寄港する船の修理や小船を造ってるんだ。 関船みたいな大きな船は、さすがにここじゃ造れんからな。 	 Can I help you with anything? We handle repairs and craft smaller boats like the ones you see here, but if you're after a sekibune or something of similar size, I'm afraid you'll have to try elsewhere.
官職の連中は、てめえらで御船蔵を作っておきながら、 飛空艇なんて浮ついたモンにうつつを抜かしてやがる。 紅玉海の産湯で生まれたことを忘れて、な。 	 Our officials have become infatuated with these flying vessels, these “air” ships. How quickly they forget our heritage with the sea.
うちの船大工たちは、 異国の船だって修理できやす。 腕利きがそろってますんでね！ 	 Our shipwrights can fix anything that floats─even one of your massive foreign vessels!
クガネ奉行直轄の飛空艇発着場でございます。 ガレマール帝国など、異国の船に加えて、 幕府が購入した船も入港するんですよ。 	 Are you seeking a particular vessel? This landing sees the arrival of foreign airships from the Garlean Empire and elsewhere, as well as craft belonging to the bakufu itself.
よぉ……アンタも休憩しにきたクチかい？ 俺は、お頭のしごきがきつくってよぉ……。 作業放り出して、三条花街にでも繰り出すかなぁ……。 	 Come to rest your weary bones as well, have you? I'm not sure I can take much more of my master's “gentle” instruction. I should slip away to the flower district and see what pleasures my meager wage can buy me...
おい、あそこの米俵積んでねーじゃねーか！ ったく……ほかに忘れもんはねーだろうな！？ 出港しちまってからじゃ遅えんだぞ！ 	 Why is that rice not in the damn hold!? Those good-for-nothin' slouches better not have forgotten anythin' else─it ain't as if we can turn the ship about once we set sail!
はぁ～……陸地ってのは、こうも暑いもんかね。 さっさと海に出て、風を浴びたいぜ。 	 Life on land is so stiflingly hot. It is truly unbearable. <sigh> I wish nothing more than to sail the open sea and to bask in the ocean winds.
東アルデナード商会の仕入れ担当なのですが…… 紅玉海産の贅沢品が思うように手に入らず、 どうしたものかと考えていたところです。 	 It is my job to procure rare items─more specifically, rare items from the Ruby Sea─for the East Aldenard Trading Company. This, however, has become increasingly difficult of late due to the restrictions that have been placed on trade in Kugane.
刀鍛冶も、ブリサエル殿への恋も、一意専心！ どれだけ困難な壁でしょうとも、全力で打ち破ってみせます！ 見ていてくださいね、殿！ 	 The love I hold for Forgemaster Brithael is only equaled by my passion for swordsmithing. Regardless of whatever it takes, I shall have him and become the greatest swordsmith to have ever lived!
ではないか。 ここは、エオルゼアとは甲冑そのものに対する考え方が違うゆえ、 素材選びから構造に至るまで、日々、驚きの連続であるぞ。 	 Ah, if it isn't ! Fancy meetin' ye here. Armory in Kugane─it ain't nothin' like what we do back home. Everythin' from the materials to the techniques that are employed are different.
そうだ！ 気合い入れて叩けよ！ 	 Hurry! Before the steel cools!
フフフ… やはり刀は美しい 	 A blade can never be too sharp, now.
小鍛冶に用か？ 中を見るのは構わんが、熱気は覚悟しておきな。 熱さに驚いて、職人の気を散らさないようにしてくれよ。 	 Waiting on a commission, miss? No? You're still welcome to have a look inside, but please don't yelp when the heat hits your face─it distracts the smiths from their work.
はぁ……こんなイイ女がひとりで黄昏れてるってのに、 お茶の一杯もおごろうとする男もいないとは……。 花より団子、色気より食い気ってことかい、まったく……。 	 To think that all the men here are more interested in stuffing their faces with dango than talking to a pretty girl and offering to buy her tea! <sigh> Are there no gentlemen left in Kugane?
ここはお茶も団子も素晴らしいが、 何よりも店主が美人なのがいいよね。 一見擦れているように見えるけど、実は乙女なところもあってさ。 	 There is no denying that the tea and sweets here are excellent, but that is not the reason I frequent this establishment. I come here to see her. Ume is stunning, is she not?
ずいぶんと、みすぼらしい顔じゃないか。 アンタが買えるような安物は、ウチの店に置いてないよ。 さっさと帰りな、シッシッ！ 	 My, you've a sorry look to you. Go on, now. You've no business here. I've nothing cheap enough to sell to the likes of you.
そこの人、探しものならウチの店を見ていっておくれ！ きっとお望みのものが見つかるはずさ。 さあ、寄った寄った！ 	 If there is aught you seek, you need look no further than my shop. Come, come! And find all that your heart desires.
本日の「無地鼓座」は舞人屋の役者たちが勢揃いだよ！ 見なきゃ損ってもんだ！ 	 We have some of our finest actors performing today! Why deprive yourself of this wondrous spectacle!? Save yourself the stabbing pain of regret and come and see the show!
チッ……赤誠組の連中め。 元は同じ農民のくせして、武士気取りで、 でかいツラしやがって。 	 Piss on those Sekiseigumi clowns. They started out the same as the rest of us, grubbin' in the dirt, but now look at 'em actin' all high an' mighty. Makes me want to puke.
それでよぉ、そんときのアイツったらよぉ…… ……っておいおい、メシぐらいゆっくり食ったらどうだ！ 喉に詰まっても知らねえぞ！？ 	 And then, this absolute beast of a man, he says─ <sigh> Would you please stop gobbling your food like an uncultured hog? You're like to choke on your chopsticks!
資材…届きましたけど… あの…重いっす… 	 Eight lengths. Just as you asked, sir.
このままじゃ 納期に間に合わないぞ！ 	 If the piermaster thinks I'm to work another twenty-bell shift, he's as daft as he looks!
こんなん運べるかって… 	 Carry all this!? Who's going to carry me!?
くぅぅ～！ 働いた後の酒はうまいねえ 	 Was right kind of them to leave all this wine in their cargo! Gahahaha!
船を磨いて男を磨け！ 船を磨いて男を磨け！ 	 Clean enough to eat off, men!
クガネの漢なら これぐらい軽いもんよ！ 	 Think we should add another to his cart? Hahaha!
体がベタベタするな～ 望海泉でも行くか？ 	 Fancy a dip down at the springs?
あら、おいでやす！ はんが、こさえてくれたベベのおかげで、 毎日、お座敷にひっぱりだこどす。 - 忙しくてくじけそうになるときは、このベベ見るどす。 すると、応援してくれはる人たちを思い出して、きばれるんどす。 えらい裁縫師さんと知り合えて、めっけもんどした～、おおきに。 	 Mistress ! I cannot thank you enough for all you have done. Thanks to you, my career as a geiko has been a success beyond my wildest dreams! - Just between the two of us, there are times when I wonder if I truly deserve this success, and I lose heart. - But when I do, I look at this dress. I think of all the sacrifices that you and Master Keimei made for me─and I vow to myself that I will make you proud.
「バクチ風水士」は、クガネの危機を煽り、 民を惑わして、一山当てようと企む悪党です。 血筋がいいからと言って、耳を傾けてはなりません。 - クガネを繁栄に導いた偉大なる風水士カザンが掲げた、 崇高な理想と技術の正当な継承者は、我々です。 	 Just as every rose has its thorn, so, too, does this city have its share of cheats and pretenders. This goes doubly so for our population of geomancers. - The worst offender? That charlatan who claims the blood of the Grandmaster Kazan, the greatest geomancer to ever live and serve the bakufu. Ware his honeyed-tongue lest you find your purse a stone's weight lighter.
財を成したければ、私ども風水士にご相談ください。 ただし相談が殺到しており、対応時期は確約できません。 謝礼を積んでいただければ、話は別ですが。 	 Any respectable merchant knows that without the sage counsel of a geomancer, their business is like to fail. Just as any respectable merchant knows that said counsel does not come cheap. If it is our counsel you seek, we can provide you with a reading in...three moons time. That is, unless you pay the expedition fee.
商売人ならば、なじみの風水士を持つのが常識です。 ですが、腕の善し悪しがありますから、ご注意を……。 くれぐれも「バクチ風水士」に惑わされぬよう。 	 Most all those who work in shipping or in trade will keep a geomancer on retainer whom they call upon before making any significant business decision. They say that behind every wealthy man, flows both wind and water.
うまいな～ これが寿司か！ 	 Rhalgr take yer sticks! Me hands'll do me fine.
こいつぁ 箸がとまらね～ 	 These 'ere sticks make fer good shovels, like.
お芝居、面白かったわね～ 	 That was the most amazing play I've seen! ...Well, this week at least.
うぃっ！ 俺は酔っぱらってね～ど… 	 I'm drunk!? YOU'RE drunk!
ようこそクガネへ！ 	 Make yourselves at home, honored travelers.
禁制品は…なさそうね 	 I will need to see what is in this crate and these barrels before sunrise.
船を手配しております しばらくお待ちください 	 A thousand apologies. Your skiff will be here at any moment.
ここのお団子おいし～ね～ 	 Not now. Eating dango.
孫が赤誠組に入隊したの！ 	 ...And then she stormed out saying she was joining the Sekiseigumi!
知ってる？ 実はお城に… 	 (I hear they keep her in the castle dungeons...)
エイッ！ 	 Strength!
ヤァッ！ 	 Honor!
トォー！ 	 Blood!
こちらの茶のほうが 好みだなぁ 	 The tea here is sublime. Not like the swill they serve at that teahouse across town.
一意専心！ 刀に心を込めるのだ！ 	 You must clear your mind and become one with the blade.
ぐるぐるぐる～ 	 Come on. It's my turn to play with the stick.
モグモグ… 	 Father will kill you if he finds out you took his drawings of the pretty maids.
御用だ、御用だ！ 	 Sound the alarm!
もう逃げられんぞ！ 大人しくお縄につけ！ 	 You will not escape us!
さぁ、寄った寄った！ お買い得だよ！ 	 Fortune smiles on the wise shopper!
下駄直し～ 草鞋もあるよ～ 	 Sandals! Get your sandals! Guaranteed to last or your next pair is free!
お肌スベスベになるわ～ 	 Would you like to join us?
うむ！ 絶景かな！ 	 It feels like I'm wearing nothing at all.
アァ！？ なんだテメェ！ 	 Back the way ye came, filthy ijin.
ここはウルダハ商館である！ 	 'Tis good to see a fellow Eorzean.
早く家に帰って、炊事の支度をしなければ。 でも、その前に……あと一束分チラシを配らないと。 	 I must get home quickly and feed my little brother and sister. But not quite yet. I must hand out just a few missives more.
風が気持ちいいな～ 	 I believe I could fly...
いいぞ！ やっちゃえ～ 	 Would someone just punch someone already?
はぁ～異人居留地「シロガネ」……。 いつか必ず、風光明媚なあの島に、家を持ってみせるわ……。 	 Ahhh, Shirogane... One day─one day I'll wake up to your pristine white sands...
どれもひんがしの国の 情緒に富んだ逸品ですよ 	 But of course all you see here is authentic!
また義賊が出たんだってよ！ 	 He was a damned pirate, I tell you. He had an eyepatch!
またお尋ねものか… 	 If I could only recall what I was searching for...
まったく… 赤誠組は何をしてるんだい 	 The Sekiseigumi bastards will be the death of us!
ヒルディブランド様が戻ってくるまで、 冒険者さんも、待っていてください～！ 	 Don't you worry, ! Inspector Hildibrand will be back in a jiffy!
拙者、しがない浪人の身でありますが、 これからも「こそドロ一匹オオカミ」を追い続ける所存。 - 事件屋の方々、そして、 殿のお力添えを得て、 必ずや、ヤツをお縄にしてみせるでござる。 	 I may be no more than a common ronin, but I am still committed to bringing the Wolf Burglar to justice. - I hope I can count on your help in the future, my friend. And that of the inspector and his assistant, I suppose...
ナシュ殿が取り寄せてくださる毛生え薬を心待ちにしつつ、 拙者も、ヨウジンボウの目撃情報を集めてみる所存。 殿、引き続きよろしくお頼み申す。 	 ...Be honest: is it unbecoming? I am told there are those whose heads are suited to the style, but never did I consider mine to be one.
ここに集まってる調査隊って人たちから、 「とりぷるとらいあど」とかいう札を貰ってね。 遊ぶ方法も、教えてもらったんだ。 - コイツが単純ながらも、奥が深くてねぇ。 戦い方を考えるのが面白すぎて、 あっという間に時間がすぎちまうよ。 	 Tell me, have you heard of Triple Triad? It is a most wondrous game. The researchers here at the pier have been teaching me how to play. - It seemed simple enough at first, but it is actually quite complex. Why, I could spend all day sitting here thinking of stratagems. In fact, I often do just that.
小金通りとは… どこじゃ？ 	 Thisss place is a maze!
逃がすものかぁ～ カゲヤマ～ 	 Kageyama must not escape us.
昔馴染みの女性が、西方の札遊びにのめり込むのを見て、 なんだか僕も興味をそそられてね。 - 調査隊とかいう西方の人たちに頼み込んで、 遊戯用の札をもらったんだけど、これがまた難しくて。 まずは戦い方を考えないとな。 	 An old friend of mine has become obsessed with a card game from the West. At first I scoffed at her new pastime, but the more I watched her play, the more the game intrigued me. - I even went so far as to trade with some foreign explorers and build a respectable deck myself. There are so many rules to learn...
どうだい、この防具。 なんだか懐かしさを感じるとは思わないかい？ 僕の求める貴重な品となら、交換してあげるよ。 	 Curious about my armor, are you? You are not the first. Upon beholding it, many have said they were taken by a strange sense of nostalgia. If you like, I would be happy to trade it with you.
早く先輩に追いつくぞ！ 	 Can't talk─gotta train!
先日、無地鼓座に芝居を観にいった折でした。 隣の席に、劇団マジェスティックに所属しているという、 大層「はんさむ」な劇団員様が座られたのです……。 - 開演前にお話ししたところ、あちらも感動巨編を稽古中だとか。 私、楽しみで楽しみで……もっとお芝居の話を聞けたらと、 あの御方が出てくるのを待っているのです。 	 A few days past, I went to watch a performance at the Mujikoza, and I was seated next to a rather outlandish but very handsome young man. - We engaged in some light conversation, and he explained that he is an actor himself, with the Majestic Theater Company. In fact, he is currently rehearsing for their latest production, though I expect he'll be finishing soon. Not that I'm following him around or anything! Perish the thought!
はーーーー…………。 温泉とは……こんなにも素晴らしいものなのか…………！ - しかも、足腰に効能が……？ まさに東方の神秘……冒険の醍醐味というヤツじゃな！ 	 <sigh> To think I lived this long without knowing the absolute joy of hot springs! - They say these waters can even help relieve soreness in the legs... Perfect for a well-traveled adventurer like myself!
あら、あなたも温泉でゆっくりしに来たの？ ここは景色も素敵だから、ついつい長居してしまうわね。 浸かりすぎて、のぼせてしまわないように、気をつけないと。 - まだしばらくは、クガネに滞在するつもりだけど、 その後は予定通り、ドマ経由でナグサの状況を確認してくるつもり。 - 東方連合が仲介になって、 現地を案内してくれる人を紹介してくれてね。 名前は確か、アトリさん……会うのが楽しみだわ。 	 ! Are you enjoying the hot springs as well? With such a lovely view, I admit that I have a tendency to linger overlong... - Grandfather and I will remain in Kugane for a time, but after that it's off to Doma, where we'll make our way to Nagxia as planned. - The Eastern alliance was kind enough to handle the arrangements, and it looks like our guide is to be someone named Atori. Oh, how I have longed for another adventure like this!
イジルドール殿たちに、温泉を満喫してもらえて嬉しいのう。 彼らはこれからも旅を続けると聞いたものでな、 なればこそ、まずは己の足腰をじっくりと労わってもらわねば。 	 I am thrilled to see Isildaure and Alianne enjoy the hot springs so! When they told me of their plans to travel beyond Kugane, I knew their first stop had to be here, in these rejuvenating waters.
殿、 六根山の件、引き続きよろしくお願いいたします。 	 Your aid in quelling the fell mononoke of Mount Rokkon is truly appreciated, but pray be mindful of your own safety. Certain tales of your exploits are rather concerning...
クガネには、ずいぶんと久しぶりに来た。 相も変わらず、行き交う人の多いことよ。 	 It has been years since I last paid visit to Kugane. It remains...crowded.
