きちーなぁ… 	 'Tis them damn 'venturers floodin' the markets.
背中が痛え 	 Jusss one...moround...
腰がはいっとらん！ 	 My mother holds her drink better than you!
水あびしてぇ！ 	 I could drink this whole tank, I could!
もっと奥まで… 	 But the air down there... It's makin' 'em ill.
ガスに気をつけろ 	 Tell the men they must dig deeper!
飲み過ぎた… 	 Cor, me bleedin' head!
肉がもうないぞ 	 I don't have the heart to tell the lads that was the last bottle...
肩が凝っちまうぜ 	 If I never see another shrew again it'll be too soon.
気を抜くな 	 We must've slain what, nine or ten score?
あぁ… 	 Used to be a man might make a decent livin' off minin' copper alone.
 	 
ここ「サゴリー関所」を抜けて進めば、 「サゴリー砂漠」がある南ザナラーンに出る。 - この辺りとは比較にならんほど 凶暴な魔物がうようよしているからな。 まあ、死にたいと言うのなら止めはせんが。 	 Ever visited the Sagolii Desert? 'Tis an incredible sight─a godsdamned ocean o' sand, stretchin' from horizon to horizon. - Shame that gettin' there ain't easier. Ye've got to pass through Zanr'ak, an' that's a good way to get yerself slaughtered by the Amalj'aa an' other foul beasties.
この門の先は凶悪なアマルジャどもがうろついている。 未熟な冒険者が足を踏み入れたところで 奴らに殺されるのがオチだ。 - 悪いことは言わん、命が惜しかったら引き返すんだ。 	 The Amalj'aa prowl the lands to the south. Venture not into their territory unless you are well prepared. - Life is a gift, adventurer. See that you do not squander yours.
心して警備にあたれ！ 	 We are the last line of defense before Ul'dah's last line of defense! Stay sharp, men!
先は危険地帯だ 	 Through the pass is Bluefog...and an army of damned imperials.
シュコォ……シュコォ…… モノにやどりし　ヒトがココロ マテリア　ひろいて　かがやきはなつ～ 	 Pshhh... Shkohhh... Airyself lives in objects. When full of airyself, object changes to stonyshine, name of materia.
ミュタミクス師は、知る人ぞ知る ゴブリン族の科学者集団「青の手」の出身であられるぞ。 彼らの知識は、シャーレアンに勝るとも劣らんという。 	 Master Mutamix was an inducted brother of the Illuminati, a goblin fraternity which has long been the marvel of the scholarly world. The knowledge they possess rivals even that of the Sharlayans.
科学者集団「青の手」って、かなり謎が多いんだよ。 でも、ミュタミクス師は技術の発展のために、 わざわざ人里に降りて、知識を広めてくれてるの！ 	 Master Mutamix belonged to a fraternity of goblin scholars known as the Illuminati, but over time found himself at odds with their secretive ways. Believing that it is through dissemination that science evolves, he betrayed his own people, taking us under his wing to pass on the secrets of materia.
金、くれねえか？ 	 Might ye spare a poor man some coin, miss?
できるだけ水で薄めよう 	 What ever do you have in that pot? It smells absolutely heavenly!
この線路の上を、鉱山から来た青燐機関車が走るんだ。 ずっしり重い鉱石を満載した貨物車を引っ張ってね。 - 私たち鉄灯団がこうして目を光らせているから、 列車は安心して走ることができるのよ。 	 Keep an eye on these tracks, an' sooner or later you'll see one of them magitek contraptions hauling a train of ore-filled wagons. - Do we got problems with thugs an' thieves making off with the shipments? Not while the Stone Torches are on the job.
この施設では、ナナワ銀山から採掘された 純度の低い鉱石から、銀を精製する作業を行っています。 - 鉱石の品質については、どうぞご安心ください。 当施設はウルダハの宝飾店「エシュテム」が運営しており、 精製には最新の技術を用いているのです。  	 This here operation takes the low-grade ore dug up in the Nanawa Mines and refines it. - Now don't you fret none about the quality o' the minerals. Everythin' is overseen by agents of Eshtaime's Lapidaries, and that means our purification techniques produce only the finest results.
あら、ここは「ブラックブラッシュ停留所」よ。 ナナワ銀山で採掘された鉱石が、列車でここに届くの。 - 中の施設では、鉱石の精製をしているんだけど、 それがまた、炉の熱気で暑くて蒸すのよね……。 外で列車を待ってるほうが、よほどマシだわ。 	 Looking for Black Brush Station? Well, you've found it. This is where the wagonloads of ore from the Nanawa Mines end up. - The raw materials are refined inside. With the furnace blazing away in there, the air becomes so stiflingly hot... I much prefer to wait on the shipments out here.
ひとつ、ふたつ、みっつ……えーと…………？ 毎日たくさんの荷物が来るから、わけわかんなくなっちゃう！ 	 Thirty-one, thirty-two, thirty-three... Hm? Bah, now my careful count has been compromised!
ハッ、隊長殿！ 	 ハッ、隊長殿！
お前もそう思う？ 	 I hear ore yields have increased twofold...but so have miner deaths.
鉱石の量増えすぎじゃね？ 	 Times are harsh. A man'll work twenty bells straight if it means food in his belly.
そうは言われましても… 	 Perhaps. If they had a little more incentive.
第七霊災が起こる前より、自警団である我々「銅刃団」は ウルダハから広がるザナラーンの交易ルートを守ってきた。 - 実力派揃いの「銅刃団」を維持できるのは、 砂蠍衆を含む富豪による資金援助のおかげである！ 風来坊の冒険者だとしても、それくらいは覚えておくよう！ 	 The Brass Blades have been keeping the trade routes safe in the Thanalan region since before the coming of the Seventh Umbral Era. - A veteran outfit like ours requires deep coffers to cover wages and upkeep, so it is fortunate that our employers include a number of Syndicate members. Keep that in mind, adventurer─this is no group of untested, two-gil rookies.
もっと早くできないのか？ 	 Can your men not move any faster?
じゃ、頼んだよ 	 Was it the markets? Or the Goldsmiths' Guild? Or maybe Vesper Bay?
足りない…またキキルンか？ 	 7...8...9... Thal's balls! It must be those damn rat-thieves again!
未使用 	 未使用
いくら近場に水があるとはいえ、 ザナラーンの痩せた土地を耕作するのは大変だったの。 長い時間と、ナナモ様の寄付がなかったらとても実現しなかった。 - 当然、作物に適した土を維持するのも大変で……。 これもやっぱ、お金が必要なのよね。 	 Even with wellsprings of water by the wayside, cultivating the dry domain of Thanalan was a daunting deed. Such an achievement could not have been attempted were it not blessed with the bounty of the sultana, and the boldness of our botanists. - But sustaining such a swath presents a plethora of persistent problems. Conundrums that only copious carts of coin can conquer.
大きくな～れ♪ 	 I wonder if they'd notice if I slipped one of these under my tunic.
この畑は貧民の食料のため、ナナモ様が作ったんだ。 ……ま、買い占めていくのは結局お金がある人だけどなぁ。 	 Sultana Nanamo maintains these fields to provide provender for the poor. It is the wealthy, however, who end up purchasing our produce...
は～い、お水ですよ～♪ 	 Drink up, my dears!
ようこそ、酒房「コッファー＆コフィン」へ！ 美味しいお酒に美味しいツマミを用意していますからね、 仕事の疲れなんて、どっかに飛んでっちゃいますよ！ 	 Welcome to the Coffer & Coffin! Be it belly-burning beverages or mouthwatering morsels, our refreshing repast shall renew your sagging spirits!
それでね… 	 And so I sliced it off and tossed it in the lake!
毎日真剣に警備をしている俺達にとって、 一番重要なのは、こうした息抜き……ってわけよ。 	 When ye spend every day with yer blade half-drawn and yer nerves strung up tighter than an Ul'dahn merchant's coinpurse, ye need a place where ye can sit down without somethin' tryin' to bite yer bleedin' arse off. 
ナナワ銀山の再開発が始まったのは、 霊災からの復興特需で鉱石の需要が増えたからなんだ。 - おかげで人も集まり店ができて、毎日美味い酒が飲める。 霊災も悪いことばっかりじゃぁねぇな、ハハハ。 	 They say they reopened operations in the Nanawa Mines to meet a voracious demand for raw materials─not surprising with all the rebuilding going on since the Calamity. - Me? I'm just glad the mines brought enough coin into the area to let Roger set up shop...and give me somewhere to stow my backside and drink while I avoid the unpleasantness of hard labor. Heh heh.
西方、異常なし 	 All's clear on the western front.
ザナラーンの荒野を越えてきた行商人は、 疲れ果てた身体を引きずって、この店に飛び込むのだ。 - そこで口にする最初のひと口は、まさに「命の水」。 この世のものとは思えないほど美味。 ふた口めからはただの酒なのだが……不思議なものよ。 	 I've seen more than a few traveling merchants dragging their sorry hides through that door after crossing the wastes of Thanalan. - First thing they order is a cup of water─nothing tastes sweeter when your throat is choked with the dust of the road. It's not long until a mug of ale finds its way into their hands, though...
ブラックブラッシュ周りは人が増えたからな、 最近こっちまで商売に来るようになったのさ。 毎日酒が飲める程度には、稼がせてもらってるよ。 	 With all the traffic coming through Black Brush Station these days, I've had no shortage of customers. Enough extra business to indulge in a daily tankard or two of ale, anyroad.
もーちょっとー 	 Jussone more cupp, littlemann! Hic!
もー、早く行くぞ！ 	 Get off your drunken arse and make ready!
第七霊災が起こったときは、 もうこの世の終わりかと思ったが…… ここから一望できるウルダハの街も、すっかり元通りだ。 - 今じゃあ、冒険道中にこうしてのんびりと釣りだってできる。 まるで悪い夢だったみたいだよ、あの第七霊災ってやつは。 	 The day the Calamity visited doom upon Eorzea, I expected nothing less than the end of existence. Yet Ul'dah once more bustles with business, as it did before.  - And here we stand, serenely casting lines into the worry-free waters. Was that terrifying event naught more than a nightmare?
1杯10ギル！ 	 What do you say, friend? Ten gil a pull!
お腹すいた… 	 Some of Stonesthrow's extra-special stew, sir!
 	 
オラ！有名に！なるだ！ 	 If it needs killin', I'm yer man. Fer a price, that is.
ウルダハ都市内は物価が高いからね、 冒険者仲間とキャンプを作って、なんとか生活しているんだ。 - お前も同じ冒険者なんだろう？ 割のいい仕事を見つけたら教えてくれよな。 	 Those thrice-damned peddlers of Ul'dah would demand the entire contents of your purse for one maggot-filled loaf of bread. Thus, some adventuring colleagues and I decided to save our gil and set up a camp outside the city. - You share our profession, yes? If you should learn of any well-paying, low-risk jobs, we could certainly use the extra coin...
…仕事くれ 	 You got any work? I'm quite handy with an axe.
もう、夢も希望も… 	 Just leave me be...
いただきますよーっと 	 Heh heh. He won't be needin' this.
…Ｚｚｚ… 	 Zzz......
…ごほんごほん 	 So...hungry...
なあ、金貸してくれよ 	 Uh, you may pass?
働く気はあんだけどなァ 	 I'd work if there were work to be had...
フヒヒ、夢想花ちゃぁ～ん 	 I am but a mere florist; the dream flowers, my children.
チッ、ゴミばっかかよ 	 I'll be eatin' like a little lord tonight!
アンタ、キヴロンの仲間？ 	 You another one of Quiveron's women?
腹へったなァ 	 If I boil the leather from these soles...
末端価格は… 	 Tell them the first pinch is on you. Understood?
前方よーし！　後方よーし！ ……ブラックブラッシュからの列車が来るまで、 ほーんと暇なんだよね……。 - でも、なぜかちょこっとサボってる時に限って、 アマジナ鉱山社のお偉いさんが見回りに来るんだよねぇ。 	 All clear to the right! All clear to the left! All clear of any potential problems until the shipment from Black Brush passes through, I should imagine. - I would slip away for a swift sip of spirits were my supervisors not possessed of such incredibly inconvenient timing for their inspections...
見回りに行くか 	 It's your turn to make the rounds!
ブラックブラッシュからの列車はまだ来ねぇなぁ。 あーあ、酒場に行って一杯ひっかけたいところだぜ。 	 The wagons from Black Brush have yet to veer into view. Ah, would that I could wander to the watering hole for a pint of precious pale ale.
俺は同じ屋号の旅亭を営んでたんだが、 霊災のせいで店を失っちまってなぁ。 ……あのときは、ずいぶんと絶望したもんだ。 - だが歯を食いしばって頑張ってな、 こうしてまた店を持つことができたんだ。 	 I had me another business once, same name as this one. Drove me to the brink of madness it did, when I lost me livelihood to the Calamity. - But I dug in me heels, worked hard, and built meself another Coffer & Coffin.
だからお前は… 	 Twelve be good! No man deserves that fate.
いたた… 	 Have mercy, milady. Some somnus's all I ask.
…げほげほ 	 <cough> <cough>
お願いします 	 Have a look, good lady! You won't regret it!
仕事欲しいなぁ… 	 Twenty gil, and I'll do whatever you want.
無理よ、絶対 	 And be some fat merchant's slave? I'd rather starve!
ウルダハで仕事を探せば… 	 I hear patrons pay good coin for live-in maids.
はいはい… 	 Where'd you want this again? I haven't all day.
お腹をすかせた子が… 	 Please! My son...he hasn't eaten in two days.
おう、金はあんのかい？ 	 Tessme s'pply reggarly t'ssure quality, I do. Hic!
古傷が痛むんだ 	 Me thigh muscles are right sore. How 'bout ye help loosen 'em up?
買ってけ買ってけ 	 We've everything you didn't think you needed!
…ハラヘッタ 	 Hm? Can I, uh, interest you in a... Oh, never mind...
いつもそう… 	 How about I help loosen them teeth from that filthy gob o' yours?
よう、おかえり 	 Don't try anything, or I'll skin ye and throw the rest in our cookpots.
えーと、あとは… 	 Bring me your best bottle of sour red!
人がいる場所には、商人が必ずいるってもんだ。 俺ら商人はこういう場所で、最新情報を交換しあうのさ。 	 Wherever there are places populated with people, you shall perforce find peddlers. Merchants often meet in such areas that they might make a mutually beneficial exchange of information.
クズ石の処分かぁ 	 What'd I ever do to get stuck with slag duty?
めんどうだなぁ 	 Got caught fondlin' the foreman's daughter is what you did.
鉱石詰めすぎだろっ！ 	 Seven hells! You think the boys could've filled this crate any fuller!?
使える部分次第だなぁ 	 Yes, but what of its purity? I won't be had twice.
凄く大きい銀鉱よ 	 'Tis the largest chunk of silver ore you've seen.
うんしょっ…と 	 (If you call river water and rat pelts “stew.”)
そうだな… 	 My turn!? I just got back!
すごいすごい！ 	 Only 5,000 more and you'll break my record!
ムグムグ… 	 I ain't been so hungry since...since yesterday!
まだまだっ！ 	 Die, fiery fiend!
実戦でできればねぇ… 	 If only all your victims were this...stationary.
す、すみません… 	 I came as quickly as I could, sir!
これだから冒険者は 	 I don't pay you to rest, boy! Back on your feet!
このあたりじゃろくな作物は育たねえ。 たまには、子供にまともなものを食わせたいぜ。 	 Despite havin' no decent soil, we've managed to grow some crops. The wee ones can enjoy a proper meal on occasion.
こんなところ一日も早く出て行きたいが…… 先に立つ金も、稼ぐ仕事もありゃしねえ。 	 I'd leave here this very day if I could, but I haven't the gil to do so. And gods know there's no work to be had in this stagnant cesspit.
そこで俺の斧がズバッと！ 	 And I took off its head with one fell swing!
へっぴり腰のくせに… 	 Hahaha! I'd hate to be that squirrel.
ここは、流砂の迷宮「カッターズクライ」。 お前に冒険者としての腕と自信があるなら、 遠慮なく入るがいいさ。 	 This here's Cutter's Cry, a maze of caverns with quicksand to boot. Go right on in, if you're that sure of your adventurin' skills.
こわいよ…ママ… 	 <sniff> I want my mammy!
フン…うまくいったな 	 Ugh, noisy bloody brat. Can't be rid of it soon enough...
青燐水、俺も買うかな… 	 Ought I invest, I wonder?
イシュガルド防衛に 力を貸してくれ！ 	 Lend your blade to Ishgard!
なんの、その…！ 	 The things I do for coin and country...
残るは3人か… 	 That leaves three...
今日という今日は… 	 Fancy seeing you here...
珍しい物を揃えてるのね 	 This selection is impressive, but I'm looking for something especially rare...
美味いんだなこれが！ 	 Down the hatch!
掘り出し物があるな… 	 I'd buy that for a gil...
買って帰ろうかしら… 	 That doesn't look half bad...
一杯やってくか… 	 Sure, I'll give it a try.
