シュコォ……シュコォ…… ここは見張り場　ゴブらの拠点！ 魔物に「青の手」　見張ってる～！ 	 Pshhh... Shkohhh... This is watchguard post. It is important place. We watchguard for nasty monsters and evil Illuminati!
急勾配だな 	 Whew, that's one sharp drop.
岩肌に鉱脈は…？ 	 Isn't the ore on the inside?
シュコォ……シュコォ…… 機械の巨人　ココに　手をついたゴブ。 スローフィクスに　頼まれて　見張ってるゴブ～！ 	 Pssshkoh... Giant of metal is holding fast to land, and Slowfix is telling Redbrix to keep eyes on big hand!
ラウンドロクスがいないことが、今でも信じられないの。 ここにくればあの娘と会えることが、いつのまにか、 あたりまえになってしまっていたのね……。 - まるで、主人のいない「がらくた」たちも、 寂しがってるみたい……。 	 I can't believe Roundrox is gone. Every time I glance at her treasures, I expect to see her crooning over them. - The Shortstop is so lonely without her. I won't rest until she's safe from the Illuminati's clutches.
シュコォ……シュコォ…… オレは見張り屋　見張りが仕事！ 迎撃　撃退　別料金！ 	 Pshhh... Shkohhh... Lightkix is watchguard, watching for Illuminati sneakypeekers. Back-fighting Illuminati? Lightkix needs more jinglyshine.
ニャーオ……♪ 	 Mew...♪
ニャーオ……？ 	 Mew...?
シュコォ……シュコォ…… ココから　巨人　見張ってる！ ココなら　巨人　よく見える！ 	 Pshkohhh... Snapclix watchguards steel giant! Steel giant will be going nowhere without Snapclix knowing!
壮年騎士団、休憩してます～。 	 Think he's sleeping, or just resting his eyes?
アタシなら、一瞬で全員やっつけることができるけど、 それじゃあ、息子が形無しだからねぇ……。 も、そう思うでしょ？ 	 ...Let me guess. Wonderin' why I haven't gone and smacked 'em upside the head and put an end to this rubbish, eh? - There's a time for crackin' skulls and a time for lettin' yer idiot of a son deal with his troubles on his own, that's why.
お、お主は！ …はて、誰じゃ？ 	 Ahhh! See!? See!? Death stalks us at every turn!
むにゃむにゃ… 	 <mumble> <mumble>
あ、あんたは！ …あれ、思い出せない 	 That's not death, you fool! It's just some passerby!
採掘師さん、様子を見に来てくださったんですね！ 現在、スチームローラーの運用試験中です！ - 実際に動かしてみると、改善点がいっぱい見つかりますね……。 でも、最技研のみんなが力を合わせれば、 きっと、あのときの青燐機関みたいに、全部解決です！ 	 , how nice of you to stop by! We are still in the midst of testing the Gobroller prototype. - The more tests we run, the more issues we find. At times it all feels a bit overwhelming, but I know we can overcome whatever issues the project throws our way. The previous performance test is proof of that!
足回りを強化すべきか… 	 We may need to strengthen the undercarriage...
軸受改良　必要よ～ 	 These bearings are not good enough.
ゲコゲコ……薬草集めに出ていたら、 キレイな絵柄のカードを拾ったケロ。 	 What a wonderful night for gathering herbs! Do you know, I found some lovely little cards with pictures and some numbers on them. I wonder if they are used for some sort of game?
