どの子を使おうかしら… 	 I suppose this'll have to do for now.
どいた、どいた 	 Out o' me way.
ワシは連れ合いも、息子夫婦も早くに亡くしましてのう。 今では一緒に住んでる孫だけが、唯一の生き甲斐ですじゃ。 	 That damn Calamity, I tell ye. I lost me wife, me son, an' me daughter-in-law in the aftermath. If it weren't fer me grandson, I don't reckon I'd 'ave much reason to linger on.
きれいに咲けよ 	 To ripe thy fruit and spread thy seed, and nourish those that tend thee...♪
新しい肥料だよ～ 	 A sprinkle here... A sprinkle there... Another sprinkle here...
2、3年前までは、粉じんで目が見えなくなるほど、 すごい勢いで鉄鉱石を掘ってたんだ。 お陰で「ブラインドアイアン坑道」なんて呼ばれてんのさ。 	 Up until about three years ago, we had crews working every ilm of these mines around the clock. The air was so thick with dust that half of them had to dig by feel. Blind iron mining, they called it. And so the name stuck.
恐くないのかねぇ 	 You haven't the stones to work down there!
ここはモラビー造船廠。 ナルディク＆ヴィメリー社の所有する、 リムサ・ロミンサ最大の造船施設だ。 - 現在、我ら黒渦団の新造船「ヴィクトリー号」の 建造が進められているため、警備を強化している。 妙な真似をしたら、ただで済まんと心せよ。 	 Ah, the Moraby Drydocks, the site of Naldiq & Vymelli's and the grandest shipyard in all of Limsa Lominsa─the perfect place to build the Maelstrom's newest warship. - We've doubled the guard around the Victory to keep an eye out for saboteurs and the like. If you want to keep your hide intact, I'd advise against any suspicious actions, adventurer. 
ひと昔前までは、地続きの岬だったんだが、 5年前の霊災で大地が裂け、海峡ができてしまったのだ。 - 岬の先には、モラビー造船廠のような 重要施設があるため、急いで橋をかけてね。 いまだ工事中ではあるが、通行は可能だ。 	 Before the Calamity gouged out a ravine here, this used to be one long, unbroken peninsula. - 'Course, seein' as the Moraby Drydocks are on the side opposite the city, construction on the bridge went forward soon as ye could blink. It ain't quite done yet, but the Embrace is sturdy enough for fully laden wagons to trundle across.
ここでは造船で使われる材木を保管している。 毎日大量に消費されるものだからこそ、 厳密に管理しないと仕事がうまく回らないのさ。 	 Think I got it easy here in the lumberyard? The builders haul off a good forest's worth o' planks each day, and it's my job to make sure every little splinter is properly accounted fer.
私は、ナルディク＆ヴィメリー社から委託を受けて 造船師さんのお弁当を作っています。 - 造船の仕事は、すっごい重労働なんです。 だから、力がたくさん出るように、 お弁当は、大盛りにしてるんですよ。 	 I'm sorry, dearie, but these lunches are for the shipwrights. Naldiq & Vymelli's hired me to make sure their lads and lasses are fed, and fed well. - The last thing you need is a hungry crafter fainting at the top of a mast and making a mess of the deck!
この材木はシダー材っていうんだ。 シダーってのは、とにかくまっすぐ育つのが特徴でさ、 マストとかヤードの材料に最適なんだぜ。 	 Cedar. That's what ye were wonderin', weren't it? Each kind o' wood has its own use, ye see. Now cedar, that's a tree what grows straight and tall, makin' it the perfect choice for masts and yardarms and the like.
俺たち造船師っていうのは木工師、鍛冶師、甲冑師…… それぞれの技術を極めた、超一流の職人集団だ。 - それだけに、リムサ・ロミンサ中から 尊敬を受けるっていうのも、わかる話だろ？ 	 We shipwrights ain't all the same, ye know. Carpenters, smitties, armorers─takes all sorts o' craftin' skills comin' together to shape a ship. - We do share one thing, though, and that's a Builder-blessed mastery in our chosen profession. Did you never wonder why a shipwright gets so much respect from the average, ale-swillin' Lominsan?
裏門といえど、警戒はぬかりない。 キャンドルキープ埠頭から来る新しい職人や 物資の輸送業者など、よそ者の利用が多いからな。 	 The rear entrance to the docks is just as heavily guarded as the front. After all, who knows what manner of strangers are among the craftsmen and couriers sailing in from Candlekeep Quay?
ナルディク＆ヴィメリー社本社へようこそ。 この窓口では、造船廠で働く職人さん向けの 事務手続きを行っております。 - 弊社との雇用契約に始まり、作業の斡旋や 給金の支払いはもちろん、弁当の手配まで。 なんでも対応いたしますよ。 	 Greetings, and welcome to the main offices of Naldiq & Vymelli's. - If you are an artisan working here at the docks, I can assist you with a variety of matters, including employment contracts, labor assignments, wage payments, even lunch deliveries. You name it, I am at your service.
助かります 	 See that it gets done, then.
新造船「ヴィクトリー号」の建造で、毎日てんてこまい。 たまには、仲間を集めてパーッとやらなきゃ、 はかどる仕事も、はかどらないわ。 	 My days are consumed with the construction of the new ship, Victory. My colleagues and I must constantly remind each other to push forward with our work, lest we grow obsessed with attaining perfection in every blow of the chisel.
表にいるミミドアさんとは、もう話した？ このナルディク＆ヴィメリー社の顧問になったのよ。 - 造った船の数も、修理した船の数も多くて 凄腕の造船師として有名なんだけど…… 私たちの話も親身に聞いてくれるところがステキなの。 	 Have you spoken with Mimidoa out front? He holds a position at Naldiq & Vymelli's as an advisor now. - Most know him, however, for his incredible skills as a blacksmith. Yet, despite his achievements, he is always willing to lend a kindly ear to those around him.
社長のハ・ナンザ姐さんは甲冑師ギルドの仕事もあるから、 リムサ・ロミンサにいることが多いんだよ。 - 彼女の代わりにモラビー造船廠を仕切っているのが、 筆頭造船師のアートビルムさんなのさ。 	 She might be the boss, but Steelmaster H'naanza's work with the Armorers' Guild often takes her to Limsa Lominsa. - While she's away, the day-to-day runnin' of the docks falls to Ahtbyrm, Moraby's foremost shipwright.
デッカイ夢だな 	 Ye try spittin' that bilge before the guildmaster.
お頭を目指してんだ 	 Come summer, I'll be runnin' these here docks.
何でもやるよ 	 You chose the right man for the job!
材木は船の要… 	 That'll be a holt's worth of lumber down there.
異常なし… 	 Take care to stand clear of the edge.
この荷は臭う… 	 This here crate reeks of rotting fish and old tar.
まだ、まだ、あるな… 	 Put yer back into it, ye nine-stone ninny! 
くっそ！ 	 Leviathan's eye! What'd they fill this bugger with!?
うっ、足りない… 	 Stop your nattering. They all do!
このキャンドルキープ埠頭から出ている連絡船は、 リムサ・ロミンサとエールポートなど、 島内の港をつなぐ海上交通の要所です。 - その役割は、お客様を運ぶだけではありません。 酒や食料などの生活必需品を、 モラビー造船廠へ搬入するためにも使われているんですよ。 	 The ferries that depart from Candlekeep Quay are the primary means of waterborne transportation between the island ports of Limsa Lominsa, Aleport, and the like. - These vessels do more than simply carry passengers from one destination to another─they also carry foodstuffs and other essential provisions to the shipwrights of the Moraby Drydocks.
俺たち灯台守は、灯台のともし火を守るのが仕事だ。 たった1人、来る日も来る日も灯し続けるんだ。 孤独な、辛い仕事だよ。 	 Rain, wind, or head-splittin' hailstorms, a candlekeep always keeps the torch shinin'. That's called a “sense o' responsibility,” missy. The thought o' bein' haunted by sailors what were dashed upon the rocks also helps a man remember his duty.
普段、我々メルヴァン税関公社の者が このキャンドルキープ埠頭に常駐することはないんだ。 ここは本来、島外からの積荷を扱うことはないからな。 	 Mealvaan's Gate assessors are not ordinarily stationed in Candlekeep Quay. There hasn't been a need since the port primarily deals in domestic cargo.
ごらんよ。 ココからだと、「ヴィクトリー号」の全体像がよく見えるぞ。 - 日に日に完成に近づいていってるのがよくわかる。 進水式を迎える日が、実に楽しみだな。 	 Look at that handsome wench. From here you can see her whole body, admire the perfection of her curves. - It'll be a glorious day indeed when we finally slip her into the water. Eh? I'm talking about the Victory, you gutter-dwellin' landlubber!
霊災のときにゃ、大きな津波が襲ってきたが 幸いモラビー造船廠は、ゴッズグリップの岬に守られて、 津波の直撃は、受けずに済んだんだ。 - だがよ、多くの傷ついた船が入港してな…… まるで船の野戦病院ってありさまだったんだ。 それが今や、新造船を造れるまでになったとはな。 	 I remember when the Calamity sent a big ol' wave crashin' onto the coast o' Limsa. The Gods' Grip sheltered the docks from the worst of it, praise the Twelve. - Lot o' folks weren't so lucky, though. A whole flotilla of battered ships limped into the bay not long after─like a field hospital for sea vessels, it were. And now these days we're puttin' together the damn things from scratch. Bloody marvelous.
ここにある鉄板を使ってな、船の装甲を作るのよ。 熱して、叩いて、伸ばして、曲げて…… 鍛冶師としての腕の見せどころってわけだ。 	 Don't look like much right now, but when I'm done poundin', stretchin', and shapin', these sheets of iron'll fit snug to the hull o' the ship. Just like a shinin' suit of armor.
受付はっ、と… 	 Perhaps if you stopped yapping and helped me look, we'd find the man.
また新入りか… 	 Lookin' for work? The offices are further down.
このモラビー造船廠に本社を置く、 ナルディク＆ヴィメリー社は、 リムサ・ロミンサの造船を一手に引き受けているのよ。 - そのナルディク＆ヴィメリー社に雇われるってのは、 造船師にとっての最高の栄誉で、憧れなの。 人材だけじゃなく、設備も最高だしね。 	 As the sole entity responsible for the construction of Limsa Lominsa's seafaring vessels, it is only natural that Naldiq & Vymelli's would establish their main offices here at the Moraby Drydocks. - For a shipwright, there can be no greater honor or privilege than to work for such a prestigious company.
船体の曲線がたまらない 	 Now that's a thing of beauty.
べっぴんな船だ 	 And what would you know about beauty?
やだ、生乾き… 	 A few more days in the sun and they'll be ready.
ネズミめっ！ 	 Blasted rats!
また、かじられた 	 Been nibblin' on yer arse again, have they?
木釘が届いたぞ～ 	 Oi! Where'd you want these nails, lads?
使いようだ 	 Then ye'll jus' 'ave to knock some into 'im!
最近の新入りってやつぁ… 	 That new hand hasn't a single wit about him!
がってんだ 	 Aye aye, Yer Highness.
小屋に運び込め 	 Take them sacks to the storehouse. And stop starin' at me arse.
どれも新鮮ですよ 	 Get your fresh fruit! Keep the scurvy at bay!
エールはいかがかね！？ 	 Come and have a taste of Aleport's finest!
すぐ治るさ 	 It'll grow back eventually.
作業中に火傷だって？ 	 The flames gone singed every last hair on me head!
タールは十分だな 	 Ye'd reckon thirty crates o' tar'd be more 'an enough.
さっさと運んじまうぞ 	 Shut yer gob and move that arse.
修繕依頼ですか？ 	 Someone should tell that poor Sea Wolf.
次の船は… 	 Where in the seven hells is my damn ship!?
修繕ばっかり 	 I'm tired of repairin' leaky galleys all day.
また！？ 	 Aye! When do we start workin' on the Victory?
視線を感じる… 	 Don't let Mimidoa hear you say that!
見かけない船だな… 	 I have me a son. Isaac's his name.
干し肉が人気よ 	 I swear if he touches me again, I'll cut off his hand!
力仕事だからね 	 That's not all what deserves a cuttin'!
ヤロウまた遅刻か 	 The damn bastard's late again.
根性なさすぎ 	 Or, just early for the morrow's work.
無理しすぎだ 	 What ye needs is to lay off the ale.
海に癒される… 	 I needs me a ship so I might see the world.
肌が荒れちゃう 	 Sure it wasn't just your reflection?
俺も… 	 Ahahahaha!
今日も夜勤さ 	 I saw a Sahagin right over there. I swear it!
ここはキャンドルキープ埠頭。 ごらんの通り小型船向けの埠頭さ。 - 元は「オシュオン灯台」の灯台守が使う港だったが 霊災直後、「モラビー造船廠」の港が 使えなくなった時期があってね。 - その頃に、復興用の物資や人材の 陸揚げ地点として活用され、拡張されたのさ。 	 Welcome to Candlekeep Quay. Head within and speak with the skipper if you require passage to Aleport. - Used to be that only the candlekeep of Oschon's Torch made use of this port, but for a time after the Calamity struck, the Moraby Drydocks were unusable. - The facilities here had to be expanded to accommodate the flood of artisans and supplies needed for the restoration efforts.
作業してるぞ… 	 I hear they're looking for men to mortar the Embrace.
船が襲われたんです 	 We saw Swallowtail Roam!
積荷が奪われた 	 Just beyond the Cieldalaes!
おら、どけ、どけ 	 Stand aside, 'venturer!
こっちこっち～ 	 Down here! Quickly now!
エオルゼアにおける羊毛の産地としては、 ここラノシア地方と、高地のクルザス地方が双璧です。 - ウチでも育てているラノシアシープという品種は、 白くてフワフワの毛が特徴でしてね。 すっごく暖かそうでしょう？ 	 The bulk of wool in Eorzea is shorn either here in La Noscea, or over in Coerthas. - La Noscean sheep are renowned for their soft white fleece, which is nothing like that coarse rubbish they peddle up in the highlands.
暴れるもので… 	 Just as you ordered, sir.
よしっ揃ったわ 	 I believe that's everything.
エサは十分だな 	 Blast! That crate was to last us the whole moon!
それはここじゃない 	 This is not where that goes! Off with you now!
くそっ重い…！ 	 Sod off, woman!
ドードー肉は揃ったよ 	 Where would ye have these sacks of dodo feed?
これで全部だ 	 Will ye be needin' these tools as well, milord?
うるせーババァ 	 You tell me when you've had enough.
もうバテたか？ 	 Just tell me when you've had enough, now.
来季の小麦は完売だ 	 We've no more wheat today.
お宅のじゃなきゃ困る！ 	 You said the same yesterday!
わざわざ来たのに 	 I have five kids to feed!
ちっ出遅れた 	 My coin is as good as the next man's!
チョコボちゃんは、とても繊細なのよ。 ほかの家畜よりも丁寧に接してあげないと、 すぐにしょんぼりしちゃうの……。 	 Chocobos are such sensitive creatures. Without a steady stream of care and affection, they soon fall into the blackest depression.
元気出して… 	 I'm sorry, Lucky...
ラベンダーの注文です 	 Another order of lavender from the Alchemists' Guild.
農場ができたばかりの頃の話だぁ。 赤い鶏が生まれてね。そいつが普通の鶏よりも、 強いかどうか、賭けをしたんだぁ。 - だが、賭けの結果で大喧嘩に発展しちまってなぁ 鶏も人も、みんな血で真っ赤に染まっちまった。 これが「レッドルースター」って農場名の由来さ。 	 Have you heard the tale behind the name of this quaint little place? It all started with the birth of a rooster, feathers as red as wine. Would that the story ended there... - See, the farmers laid wagers on this bird being stronger than the others, but the contest grew ugly. Blades were drawn, and both roosters and onlookers were splattered with scarlet shades of blood. Not so quaint now, eh?
最近、人気だな 	 The Gridanians'll be none too pleased 'bout that.
うちの小麦さね 	 Er... Flour?
味の秘訣は…？ 	 You simply must tell me the recipe for this gruel!
クエッ 	 Kwark!
さっさとしろ 	 You need me to call one of the milkmaids to help you with that?
レッドルースター農場の作物は、 大きさ、美味さ、収穫量、どれをとってもラノシア随一！ おかげさんで、注文もひっきりなしさ。 - だからこそ、手早く正確に荷をさばいてやらんとな。 新鮮さが失われちまったら、精魂込めて 作ってくれた農夫たちに申し訳がたたねぇや。 	 The Red Rooster Stead boasts the greatest harvests of the biggest and best produce in La Noscea. - It needs to be picked and shipped cleanly and quickly so that it reaches market at its freshest. Anything less would be doing the growers an injustice.
よく働いた… 	 I haven't worked so hard since...since yesterday!
むにゃむにゃ… 	 I claim this bed in the name of...me!
ク…エェェ… 	 Kwe...eh...
北にあるレッドルースター農場に、 何か用事でもあるのかい？ - あそこで作られた小麦や羊毛は、 リムサ・ロミンサにとって重要な輸出品でね。 私らが、ここで街道を警備しているのも、そのためさ。 	 The Red Rooster Stead lies to the north of here, which is why we defend this highroad. - The barley and wool the Stead produces feed and clothe the people of Limsa Lominsa.
柵に帰るよ 	 Back to the corral, boy.
しっかりしろ… 	 We've no choice but to put the poor beast down.
散歩して疲れさせよう 	 Millioncorn and lettuce, sir.
肥料を変えよう 	 You ever seen a red rooster?
豆を植えれば？ 	 Only after I've fried one in dragon peppers.
いったん置かせてくれ 	 But we were specifically told the south shiel.
羊毛が足りん 	 The sheep are so en- gorged, they can't move! What is that feed!?
エオルゼア広しといえど、 ここほど、多くの風車が集まった場所はねぇぞ。 - 吹き付ける海風を利用し、 小麦を挽いたり、羊毛を加工したりと、 まさに百人力の働きをしてるのさ。 	 Eorzea spans far and wide, but nowhere will you find so many windmills as here! - Harnessing the winds that blow in from the sea to grind grain and felt fleece─is it no less than sorcery?
あたしたち風車番の仕事は、 レッドルースター農場から送られてくる品を、 風車を使って加工すること。 - だから、小麦の収穫期や、 羊毛の刈り取りの時期は忙しいのよね。 	 While the mill turns in perpetuity, our toils are tied to the ebb and flow of the Stead. - During harvests and shearings, we rarely catch a wink.
風車の整備なら、任せておいてよ。 うちの風車が、一番よく働くって言われるように 頑張ってるのさ。 	 A miller takes special pride in his mill, and I couldn't be prouder of this one.
ほれ見てみい、深紅に染められた羽根車を。 あれは、大型船に使われる帆布を転用しとるんじゃ。 帆布は潮風に強いからのう。 - ここら一帯が「灰色の艦隊」、 「グレイフリート風車群」と呼ばれるのも、 風車を船になぞらえてのことなんじゃ。 	 These mills are built from the dead works and dunnage of decommissioned ships, the cloth taken from masts of the armada. - Though they may no longer ride the waves, the old ship bones still remain a fleet.
空が灰色に染まってしまうような嵐でも、 強風を力に変えてしまう、タフな風車たち。 「グレイフリート風車群」の名は、伊達ではありませんよ。 	 The “Grey” in “the Grey Fleet” owes to the mills' ability to withstand even the grimmest of storms.
家畜は、一頭ずつ体も性格も違うから、育てるのは大変だ。 だが、動きや表情がかわいらしいし、愛情こめて接すると、 その分良く育ってくれるから、やりがいがあるよ。 	 As anyone who's ever raised livestock will tell you, animals feel and show emotions as deep and real as yours or mine. One need only look for the telltale signs: a fetching pose, a come-hither stare, some provocative tail-whipping... My pets never fail to show me the same love I show them.
鉱脈がほぼ尽きてしまったようで、 ここ最近、鉄鉱石の採掘量は右肩下がりだ。 - それでも、掘った先から、 ナルディク＆ヴィメリー社が買ってくれるんで、 助かってるよ。きっと船の建材にするんだろうな。 	 Slim diggings of late. I'd say we've mined her for all the ore she's got. - Luckily, Naldiq & Vymelli's has signed for the lot of it. Should make for some sturdy ships.
この農場は、メルウィブ提督から 入植政策の見本であれ、と期待されている。 その秘訣は、先進的な農法を数々ためしていること。 - 本草学者である私を、わざわざ招へいして さまざまな農法を試しているのだ。 おかげで、私の研究も進んで助かっている。 	 The Admiral herself has seen it fit to dub our stead an exemplary model of her settlement initiative. - As a Stead botanist, I attribute our success to unyielding innovation─our willingness to attempt any and all agricultural techniques at least once, no matter how counterintuitive or potentially embarrassing.
うちのドードーたちは、 ここで取れた作物を食べてるので元気一杯よ。 元気すぎて、時折、柵を壊して逃げちゃうの……。 - 逃げ回って運動しているから、 肉質も引き締まるし、卵も大きくなるのよね！ 	 The dodos love the farm-fresh food so much, they're always pecking at the fences! - Sometimes they'll even peck themselves free and run about. I suppose the exercise is good for them, but it's certainly not what I need!
この「ブラインドアイアン坑道」は、鉱脈が尽きかけているそうで 今では、もっぱら「ゼファー陸門」方面に向かう通り道ですね。 	 
わ、わ、何事ですかぁ！？ 	 Take me, but leave the lunches!
ぐ、ぐぅ… 	 Me gut...
はぁ、はぁ… 	 <pant> <pant>
ド、ドックを頼む… 	 The docks... You must... secure the... <cough>
にゃっ大変だにゃー 	 Perhaps this isn't the best place to hide...
ヴィ、ヴィクトリー号がぁ… 	 Protect the Victory!
か、海賊どもが… 	 P-P-Pirates!
ひぃぃ助けてくれぇー 	 They're all yours!
こりゃやばい！ 	 Go on, then! Knock some sense into them!
柵が壊れちまってな 	 Damned fowl keep kicking over the paling...
霊災以降、メルウィブ提督の政策が奏功して、 違法な海賊はかなり減っているのだが…… それでも、しぶとく残っている奴らはいてな。頭が痛いぜ。 	 The Admiral's ban on piracy has proven effective, by and large. The only problem is, the ones that refuse to give up the life are the absolute bloody worst of the lot.
ソルトストランドの巨大な塩の柱は、 霊災時に降ってきた炎によって、一夜にしてできたという。 周囲にどんな影響が出ているのかは、目下調査中だ。 	 It is said that the odd pillars on the Salt Strand were formed the night Bahamut's flames rained from the heavens. I am currently studying the formations to see what influence, if any, they exert on the surrounding area.
造船師ってキッツイな 	 Why'd I wear my mail for this?
よく乾いてるわ 	 Dry as bones.
あ、あちぃ… 	 I reckon one could burn just about anything in there.
遊びましょ～ 	 Is it true what they say about Sea Wolves?
ステキな商人さん 	 And your gilded scepters?
ガッハッハッハ 	 Why don't you find out?
農場で働くっていうのは、そりゃ楽じゃないさ。 だけど、どうしてだろうね？ アタシは、この仕事を辞めようとは思わないんだ。 	 Sure, farm life sounds plenty splendid and all, but for some reason, I'm not quite ready to give up this drudgery.
海そのものは御せずとも、 海上を制するのが、我ら黒渦団の役目。 いかなる荒波にも負けず、任務を遂行いたしますッ！ 	 Though we cannot command the sea itself, it is the Maelstrom's charge to ensure safe passage for all who sail upon it. Come hells and high water, we will perform our duty! 
はぁ……はぁ……。 長旅に加え、過酷な肉体労働とは……。 俺の腰が、いななきを上げそうだぜ……グハッ！！ 	 Owww, my back. “Our legs we must be using,” he says. Like I need any lessons in lifting from some holier–than–thou northeasterner! 
カロットといえばクルザスが有名だけど、 うちの農場でも栽培をしてみたんだ。 なかなか大きくて、甘いカロットが実ったよー！ 	 You see this place, girl? It's not Coerthas, but we're growing carrots, and growing them big an' sweet!
エオルゼアで最も名高い傭兵団とまでいわれた、 伝説の「海雄旅団」か……。 私も団員に会うのは初めてよ。 - 蛮神「タイタン」と「リヴァイアサン」を倒したのだから、 どんな屈強な戦士かと思ったけれど…… ずいぶん平和なところに隠居しているのね？ 	 The Company of Heroes is the most celebrated mercenary band in the history of Eorzea. Even so, I must admit I have never before met one of their members face-to-face. - I imagined that a warrior who had toppled both Titan and Leviathan would seek to bask in a lifetime of fame and glory...yet he seems to have settled in a place distinctly bereft of adoring crowds.
ここは「ギルド海獣隊、出陣！」の会場よ。 「紅蓮祭」の催しもののひとつなの。 	 Beating the heat─that's what any summer festival worth its salt offers participants, and the Moonfire Faire is no slouch. Here at the Rousing Douse event, refreshingly cool is the order of business!
ここは「ギルド砲兵隊、実演！」の会場だよ。 冒険者ギルドが主催する紅のお祭り、 「紅蓮祭」の催しもののひとつなんだ！ 	 This is the venue for the, um, cannon event for the Moonfire Faire. It's fun, it packs a punch, and─most important of all─it's family friendly!
ナニナニ、御用っちゃ？ 	 Hoho, a handy blade for each hand!
なるほどな… ほかに情報はないか？ 	 Is that it? What else can you tell me?
遅い…まだ来ないのか… 	 They're soddin' late. Again.
ともに戦いましょう！ エオルゼアのために！ 	 We fight as one! For all Eorzeans!
すまぬが、アジムステップへ向かった我が弟のこと、 よろしく頼むぞ！ 	 Please, . You have to find my brother. Heavens only know what trouble that lovesick fool has gotten himself into.
