殺気あふれて…異常なし！ 	 Ain't nothin' like the smell o' blood, sweat, an' brine.
…………見えた！ 	 <gasp> ...I have it! The ultimate strategy!
生身の人相手だもんね 	 Nothin' turns me on like goin' hard at it with a fellow 'venturer.
……さては偵察ね？ そんな事したって、結局、戦いってのは出たとこ勝負よ。 臨機応変に対応した者が勝つんだから……。 	 Here to scout out potential opponents, I'd wager? Well, you're wasting your time─there's no way of knowing who you're going to face in the Pit until you actually face them. - If you are serious about winning, you must learn to adapt to whatever is thrown at you. Either hit the ground running, or simply hit the ground.
腕がなるな 	 That fool would've done as well to slap me with a book.
物資が毎日、大量に送り込まれていて、 品目の確認だけでも手いっぱい…… 参加者の熱意に水を差さぬよう、迅速に対処しなくては。 	 Boatloads of supplies and provisions are delivered daily, and it takes the better part of my shift to sort through them all. - It's no small coup, keeping this place running smoothly, but we give it our best, that you adventurers might concentrate on beating each other senseless.
経験を積んだ冒険者を完膚なきまでに叩きのめすのは、 どんな冒険の旅よりも刺激的……そう思いません？ 思いますよね！？　だからあなたもここにいるのでしょ？ 	 Traveling to distant lands, uncovering the secrets of long-lost civilizations... Such things have their appeal, but there's nothing quite like the visceral pleasure of trouncing your fellow man in the Pit. - It's that feeling of exhilaration that brings us all here─your good self included, I do not doubt.
次も手ごわいらしいわ 	 Um, he was a scholar, you know...
うーん釣れないな… 	 I come for the view, I stay for the fish.
また餓えた狼が現れたか……。 血の匂いで満ちた檻にぶち込まれたくば、何をおいてもまず、 この船の奥にいるベルクーヤ大甲士に名のりをあげられよ。 	 Ah, yet another ravenous wolf finds her way to the Den. If you would sate your hunger, then report to Captain Loetahlsyn within the ship yonder.
この先にある「個人演習場」は、 黒渦団が解放した訓練施設です。 冒険者同士で実戦練習ができるんですよ。 - 自分の力量をすべて発揮して戦えるそうで、 実力不足な私は、まだ足を踏み入れることができませんが……。 	 If it's a fight you seek, you'll find the dueling arena just over there, down the pier. Doubtless you'll find no dearth of opponents against whom you might test your mettle. Why, perhaps I myself will even join the fray! - That is, of c-course, assuming that murderous she-devil of a Lalafell is not still there... M-Might you...take a look for me?
