ここはベスパーベイからの大量の物資が届くからね、 あちこち散らばる物資の確認で大変よ。 変なものが入ってないか、ちゃんとチェックしなきゃ！ 	 It's a pain in the arse checkin' every shipment out of Vesper Bay, but somebody's gotta do it. Otherwise, crates might start fallin' off the backs of the wagons, if you catch my drift.
いい話が… 	 I hear there's good coin to be made selling relics from the Footfalls.
本当か？ 	 But they say that place is cursed!
この先はウルダハ都市内だ 	 If you don't know where you are, you shouldn't be here, traveler.
騒ぎを起こすなよ 	 Move along.
東回りでいくか 	 I say we go east!
西回りにしよう 	 I say we go west!
ここは泣く子も仕事を与えられる、 物資輸送の中継地点、スコーピオン交易所だ！ - ベスパーベイって港から荷揚げされた品が、 ここを経由してウルダハや集落に向かうんだがな…… 多いんだよ荷物が！　足りないんだよ荷運び人が！ 	 Welcome to Scorpion Crossing, friend. The finest waypoint in Thanalan, if I do say so myself. - Goods from Vesper Bay pass through here on the way to Ul'dah and elsewhere. Sadly, there are far too many crates to haul, and far too few hands to haul them.
仕事の邪魔はするなよ 	 Stand clear of the gate, or you'll find yourself under a chocobo's talons.
街で一杯やりたいぜ 	 One day, Ul'dah. One day.
街道を行くとシルバーバザーよ 	 Follow the Sunway south to the Silver Bazaar, north to Horizon.
この交易所には、ウルダハに納品する品が集まっている。 金目のものがあるからって妙な気を起こすんじゃないぞ。 	 Keep yer hands where me eyes can see, 'venturer. There'll be no thievin' in the Crossin' on me watch.
ラプトル運送だ！ 	 Everything must go!
よし…よしっと 	 Four coffers, each containing 63 ponzes of ore... Carry the one...
腹へってきたな 	 Don't happen to have a hot pie on you, do you?
街道の様子は… 	 The Royal Sunway is clear!
よーしよしよし、貴方は元気かしら？ 今おいしいエサと水をあげるからね、 次の積荷も頑張ろうね。 	 You're a good boy. Yes, you are. Oh, yes, you are! Who hauled that cargo all the way here? My good boy did. Oh, yes, he did! Here's some water and gysahl greens for my good boy.
えーっと… 	 Two hundred and fifty-two, you half-wit!
よし……特に異常なし。 荒野を走るから怪我が絶えないんだ。 貴重なチョコボだし、大事にしてやらないと。 	 
クエ～ッ 	 Kweeeh!
ええと、倉庫に入れておく荷物と、 ウルダハの都市内へ運ぶ荷物と、 他の集落へ配達……ああ忙しい！ 	 Cargo bound for the holds, check. Cargo bound for Ul'dah, check. Cargo bound for the camps, check. Cargo bound for... Gods, what I'd give for a vacation!
えっ、こんなに頼んだか？ 	 I do not recall ordering this many Lalafellin lentils!
どうぞご利用を！ 	 Prices won't be this low again until the Eighth Astral Era!
め、目がまわる… 	 I shouldn't have had that sixth bottle of sour red!
これでよし、と 	 All appears to be in order.
ここは、ノフィカの井戸である。 豊穣の女神ノフィカが与えてくれた、貴重な水源だ。 罰当たりなことをするんじゃないぞ。 	 The Wells are a blessing from Nophica Herself. So show some respect and dispose of your refuse elsewhere.
おいしい儲け話はないもんかねえ……。 ま、こんなしみったれた集落じゃ無理な話か。 	 I think it's time I move on from this godsforsaken place. Haven't made a single bloody gil since I came. 
また引っ越したって 	 I spied the old miller taking down his tent.
どんどん人が… 	 He'll be the third to leave in as many days!
この港は静かだろう？ 入ってくる船も出ていく船もほとんどないんだ。 - 俺が生まれたころは、 桟橋に係留できないくらい船が来てたんだって。 とてもそんな風に見えないんだけど、本当かな？ 	 Damn quiet for a port, ain't it? Hardly any ships making berth here no more. - Hells, when I was just out my mammy, time was you couldn't find a spot to piss off the docks, so many were the ships. Wouldn't think it to look now, would ya?
…店はやってないぜ 	 Nothin' fer sale here.
ナシ 	 
あ～だりぃ～ 	 Can't you see I'm workin'?
ナシ 	 
とれねえなあ 	 Nothin's bitin'...
不味い酒だ 	 This wine tastes of piss!
仕事さえあれば… 	 That would explain your breath!
ナシ 	 
今日は……漁にはでねぇよ。 明日になったらまた考えるさ、明日になったらな。 	 The fish aren't biting today. But there's always tomorrow. Aye, there're always tomorrows.
何が悪いってんだ 	 Wha? Me gil's not good enough fer ye?
迷惑なの！ 	 It would be...if you had any!
全く、何人かの強情者のせいで シルバーバザー周辺の再開発が進まん。 さっさと権利書を売ってどこかに行ってくれんかな。 	 My associate and I want only to help rebuild and restore the Silver Bazaar to her former glory. Unfortunately, several of the local residents continue to refuse our generous offers to purchase their property.
うむ、うむ 	 Then make it so.
第七霊災以降、ウルダハは人が増えてな。 ここに高級居住地を増設するために、 杭打塔で地盤を固めてるのさ。 - とはいえ、迫る納期に、進まない土地確保…… 問題ばかりで頭が痛いぜ。 	 There've been more and more people come to Ul'dah since the Calamity. The hammers are pounding the ground solid so as to make it fit for new homes for the rich. - I hear they're having trouble securing some tracts, though. Whoever's job that is, I don't envy them.
金を積めば余裕さ 	 I cannot say. But that won't stop me from trying.
いけるか？ 	 Is it possible?
ふう…はあ… 	 Wavin' yer hand like that ain't gonna make it any less hot.
どうだい、海の向こうから届いた舶来品が勢ぞろい！ ウルダハじゃ、ちょっと手に入らない品だぜ？ 	 Finest imported wares, straight from the ship's hold to you! Not even in Ul'dah will you find such a wide selection!
景気がいいねェ 	 I'm thinking of courting that assessor. The one who ties her hair up, like.
しょうがねェ、新しい仕事を探すとするか。 どこかにガッポリウハウハな鉱山はないもんかねェ？ 	 Well, it is what it is. But even if there's no work to be had here, there's always a place for a man with a strong back who knows how to swing a pickaxe!
まったく魔物だか何だか知らねェが、迷惑な話だぜ。 このままじゃ、おマンマ食い上げちまう！ 	 Beasts, demons, Garleans─it's a pain in the bloody arse whatever it is! How's a man supposed to feed hisself?
次から次へと商人がやってきて 忙しいったらありゃしねェ…… もっと楽して稼げる仕事はねェのかなァ？ 	 This never-ending procession of merchants will be the death of me. There must be an easier way to make an honest gil─say, fighting wild beasts in the Coliseum, or some such.
ううむ、マズイぞ……このままでは破産だ！ なんとか月末までに帳尻を合わせなくては……。 	 What the hells am I to do with three crates of vanya silk gloves─all left-handed!? If I can't find a buyer by next moon, I'm ruined!
警備の邪魔だ、関係のない奴は散った散った！ 	 Can't ye see I'm on watch here? Now piss off 'fore I have ye locked up!
現在、呪術士ギルドのお偉方が 遺跡の調査を行っている。 - あんまりドタバタ走り回って、 仕事の邪魔をするんじゃないぞ！ 	 Some thaumaturge elite have been poking around the ruins. Waste of time if you ask me. - But to each his own, I suppose. So long as they don't get in the way of us doing real work!
見ての通り、ここは鄙びた漁村さ。 三日月型の入り江があるから、 「クレセントコーヴ」って呼ばれている。 - 昔はそれなりに活気があったんだけどな……。 霊災で潮の流れが変わって、漁獲高が激減したんだ。 お陰で今はからっきしだよ。 	 Our cove is shaped as the moon when it first waxes and last wanes. It's from there our village takes the name Crescent Cove. - Times were good here...until the Calamity befell. Now the waters flow in ways they didn't, fish no longer are where they were, and hauls are too scarce to make it worth the while.
あ～あ、どうせ爆釣しても、 盗賊のヤツラが、み～んなもってっちまうんだ。 働くだけ損ってヤツだぜ。 	 <sigh> What's the bleedin' point anymore? Anything I fish up, the bandits carry off! I'm better off just layin' down and dyin'.
底引き網は、海底のゴミをひっかけて、すぐ傷むんです。 それを繕うのも、漁師の妻の大切な仕事です。 	 Mendin' nets is the first work of any fishwife. The nets are always gettin' torn on rocks and coral, and pullin' up all manner of rubbish besides.
す、すみません！ 弟が暴言を……堪忍してください！ - ああ、冒険者さんでしたか。よかった……。 盗賊たちに聞こえたら、どんな酷い目に遭うか……。 	 Please, ma'am, don't mind my brother. He doesn't mean what he says. He's touched, you see, and─ - Oh, you're an adventurer. I thought you were one of the bandits. Gods forbid they hear the things my brother says about them.
やめとけって 	 You heard what became of the last party!
コブラン怖くて採掘師できるか！ 	 Aye, but what choice do we have?
どうなっちまったんだ？ 	 The Concern decides who may pass.
奥は危険だ 	 You don't want to go back there.
ここはアマジナ鉱山社所有の「カッパーベル銅山」。 300年前のソーン朝時代に、 王家によって開発された銅山だ。 - 20年前に王家からアマジナ鉱山社が買い取り、 現在、再開発が進められている。 - 開発現場に、興味本位で立ち入られては困る。 仕事が欲しいのなら、 ここから西にあるホライズンへ行ってみたまえ。 	 Copperbell Mines were first opened by royal decree during the Thorne Dynasty, over three hundred years ago. However, due to the Great Giant Revolt, the mines were sealed and abandoned for centuries. - The Concern purchased the mines from the royal family twenty years ago, but saw no need to resume operations until recently. Demand for ore rose sharply in the wake of the Calamity, and only fools would let developed mines go to waste─or so they thought. - Should've left it all buried and forgotten, if you ask me.
やなこった 	 Nothing or double!
もう一勝負！ 	 You play cards about as well as you comb your hair.
準備はできてる？ 	 You didn't forget the leves again, did you?
この先は閉鎖中だ 	 This gate is to remain closed.
その服どこのブランド？ 	 Where ever did you find that tunic?
いいでしょ？ 	 Sunsilk, of course!
それくらい私だって！ 	 Pah! I saw you swipe it from a stall in Stonesthrow!
…お前もか 	 Where else can we go?
他で商売やろうぜ 	 This place is deader than a lichyard.
残り少なくなったわね… 	 They're all so stunning. I simply cannot decide!
ナシ 	 
ナシ 	 
汚い手で家具に触るなよ 	 Keep those filthy gropers off the merchandise, you.
未使用640 	 未使用640
お…お？ 	 Just a little closer...
ナシ 	 
画期的な工法で… 	 And doing so could improve productivity threefold!
視察中だ 	 I'm to see no harm comes to his lordship as he inspects the hammers.
邪魔をするなよ 	 You'd best leave...now.
だから金持ちは… 	 And when the Brass Blade is turned away─
しっ、黙っとけ 	 Shhh! Keep it down!
音が頭に響く… 	 Someone make the pounding stop!
すぐに慣れる 	 Well, maybe if you hadn't downed that last bottle...
ふむ… 	 Impossible! I calibrated them myself this morning!
少し遅くないか？ 	 I believe the gears are showing signs of slowing.
ぼやぼやしてるな 	 Back to work, or I'll dock another hundred gil!
わ、わかってるよ 	 Sir! Right away, sir!
やっと一服だ 	 A wanderin' minstrel gave me this here pipe.
歯車掃除も楽じゃねえや 	 What were if I waved it right crackin', like?
話が違う！ 	 Ye said I'd be gettin' fifty fer each load!
ん？妙に軽いな？ 	 These feel lighter than they should...
だいぶガタがきてるな 	 Where the hells is that rattling coming from?
どこ置くんスかァ～？ 	 Move yer arse, so I can set this bugger down.
ぐぬぬぬぬぬぬ 	 Ach! Me back!
取引は終わりだ 	 That was last week. Today, I can offer you six.
注文通りですよ 	 Thirty crates, delivered by dawn. Just as ordered.
歪みはないな？ 	 No, no! This will not do! The wheels will have to be replaced forthwith!
それでなぁ… 	 And the miner said, “But I don't have a daughter!”
またオメェは… 	 No. Still don't get it.
ふんふ～ん♪ 	 Did I just see what I thought I saw?
クー…クー… 	 Zzz... Zzz... Zzz... Zzz... Wark? Zzz...
魔物がこっち来ませんように 	 There are no beasts trailing you, are there?
アンタ、許可とってんのか？ 	 I cannot allow you to leave until your cargo has been inspected.
機械油臭せェ！ 	 Mind your step, adventurer.
あれ、荷物が足りないぞ？ 	 Never heard of the beast.
ふんぬぬぬぬ！ 	 Thal's balls, this is heavier than an aurochs!
銅山は閉鎖かねェ… 	 Copperbell's done for, I tell ye.
考古学はロマンなのよ！ 	 If I told you once, I've told you a thousand times!
遺跡の調査に戻りたい… 	 Forgive us!
また始まった… 	 My apologies, Master.
申告漏れは許さないわよん 	 Touch anything, and Bloody Catapult here will tear your arms off.
ここに署名だ 	 Sign there...there...there... and there......oh, and there.
検品の受付は奥だ 	 The assessors' office lies in the rear.
未使用710 	 未使用710
これじゃ鼻血もでねェよ 	 Perhaps a coin or two could speed things up.
長旅ごくろうさん 	 Easy. I'm almost done.
はぁ～ちょっと一休み 	 Never again will I assay the ride from Gridania in a single turn of the sun.
盛況、盛況！ 	 I've my eye on each and every one of this unsavory lot!
一列に並べ！ 	 Get the birds out of here! Now!
小役人め…偉そうに 	 Come over here and say that, you baseborn dog!
これでよし、と…… 	 Five...six...seven? Why, that double-crossing rat!
関税高ェよ！ 	 Two days!? We cannot wait that long!
この様式は… 	 Yalik senleh...ahamat zah... Or is it jah...?
なるべく丁寧に扱いたまえ 	 Quickly now, lads! We haven't all day.
ベラフディア時代の遺跡か 	 The entrance must be here somewhere!
考古学って案外地味だなァ 	 Could we not simply hire a few urchins from Stonesthrow to do this?
おおっ、これはもしや… 	 Hand me that lan─ Oh, another adventurer...
うわ、苔がヌルヌルだ 	 I should have left my robe back at the Ossuary.
こんな調査が金になるのかねェ 	 I see naught but a pile o' rubble. 
き、君だよ… 	 I hope you like orobon!
何釣るつもり？ 	 Only if I can have the eyes!
…ぐー… 	 Sleeping!? I was merely shielding my eyes from the sun!
…ふぅ 	 I swear that bloody sun's hotter since the Calamity.
俺、ゼッタイ金持ちになる！ そんで、この村からアイツらを追い払ってやるんだ！ 	 I ain't afraid o' no bleedin' bandits! If I could just get my hands on a good blade, I'd get rid of 'em myself, I would!
せめて晩飯を… 	 The Spinner pulls, but the Wanderer pushes away.
雑魚ばっかだな 	 A barrel full o' bream; a pocket full o' naught.
ここより先は中央ザナラーン。 アラグ陽道はまだまだ続くぞ。気をつけてな。 	 If you're headed to Black Brush Station, just follow the Sunway. She'll lead you there.
どうもどうも、僕はここで備蓄品の管理をしています。 見ての通り、荷物管理でてんてこ舞いの場所です、 仕事が無くて困るということはありませんね。 	 My administrative duties require my undivided attention. Do not trouble me unless we have business to discuss.
約束が違う 	 You'll not get a gil more than what was agreed upon!
もう一声！ 	 I got you here a full bell early. I'm thinkin' that be worth another hundred.
どこいったかなぁ… 	 I run a business, not an almshouse. If it is coin you seek, get a job.
船、来ないな 	 I should've learned to play the mandolin...
ふごー… 	 <snore>
あと半日ってとこかな 	 These should fetch a fine price at the markets.
あいつら、追っ払ってやる！ 	 Where's my meal, woman!?
そんな勇気もないクセに 	 Get it your Twelve- damned self, you lazy son of a mutt.
次の漁までもつかしら… 	 Don't let your da hear you talk that nonsense!
おなかへったー 	 When I grow up, I want to be a cully-narian!
昔は立派な網元だったんだがな 	 One lousy night in the salting house, and me whole body reeks o' cod!
くそ、エサをもってかれた 	 Have any ale on you? No? Then bugger off.
チンケな漁村だぜ 	 Not another turn of the sun in this piss'ole...
潮時ってヤツだな 	 The winds just ain't right.
出稼ぎに行こうと思うの 	 Mimilo's husband fell asleep in the salting house last night...
不味い肉だぜ 	 Gah hah hah! <choke> <cough> Hah hah!
きゃはははははは！ 	 Hah hah hah! Who says I needs me a man?
酒だよ、酒もってきな！ 	 I'm more man than you'll ever need, lass!
異常なし！ 	 Keep your weapons sheathed or you'll have me to answer to.
珍しい酒沢山あるぜ 	 You look awfully...sober. Might be we can fix that.
ぬお～！ 	 Mind givin' me a hand?
ここはウルダハの海の玄関口、ベスパーベイだ。 リムサ・ロミンサをはじめ、海の向こうから届く、 様々な交易品が荷揚げされているよ。 	 City folk ought to thank us every day for our hard work. Vesper Bay may be Ul'dah's gateway to the five seas, but it's the dockmen who see that the shipments flow through it.
次はラノシアオレンジをだな 	 Used to be there was two moons, there was.
え～… 	 You think I forgot that already!?
もう間もなくになります 	 The captain claims he found nothing.
次の出航はいつかしら？ 	 But I know I had the ring when I boarded in Limsa!
真ん中のでけぇ銅像は、砂蠍衆の「ロロリト」像さ。 第七霊災の後のベスパーベイ改修作業にあたって、 大金を出したみたいでさ、その貢献を称えているんだと。 - しっかし、金持ちってのは悪趣味だなぁ……。 大体、本物のロロリトよりかなり美化…… おっと、あぶねぇ、あぶねぇ。 	 They say Lord Lolorito practically funded the reconstruction of Vesper Bay himself. That's why the town honored him with that humongous bronze statue. - It's a bit much, though, don't you think? I'd wager he's much fatter and uglier. But, uh, that's just between you and me.
ようこそ、港の小さな酒場へ。 船酔いがひどかったら、ここで休んでいくといいわ。 ただ、今度は二日酔いになっても知らないわよ？ 	 Welcome to the Pissed Peiste, love! Why not have a drink while ye wait for yer ship? Just don't blame us if ye forget to board it!
未使用：荒：会話00506 	 未使用：荒：会話00506
未使用：荒：会話00507 	 未使用：荒：会話00507
未使用：荒：会話00508 	 未使用：荒：会話00508
未使用：荒：会話00509 	 未使用：荒：会話00509
未使用：荒：会話00510 	 未使用：荒：会話00510
未使用：荒：会話00511 	 未使用：荒：会話00511
未使用：荒：会話00512 	 未使用：荒：会話00512
未使用：荒：会話00513 	 未使用：荒：会話00513
未使用：荒：会話00514 	 未使用：荒：会話00514
未使用：荒：会話00515 	 未使用：荒：会話00515
未使用：荒：会話00516 	 未使用：荒：会話00516
未使用：荒：会話00518 	 未使用：荒：会話00518
未使用：荒：会話00519 	 未使用：荒：会話00519
未使用：荒：会話00520 	 未使用：荒：会話00520
申し訳ないでっすが、ここは一般の方の立ち入りは、 お控えいただいておりまっす。 すみやかに、お引き取りねがいまっす。 	 Please be advised that this is private property. Unless you have pertinent business here, I must ask you to leave.
ンマッ、そこのアナタ！ アテクシのことをジロジロ見たりして……。 もしかして、アテクシのことが気になってるのォ～？ - この美の伝道師であるアテクシに目をつけるなんて もしかして、カラフルなオシャレに興味あ～るのかしらん？ 	 You there! Yes, you! You were gazing at me with lustful eyes, weren't you? Don't even think to deny it! - Well, I shall say to you this: you have exquisite taste, my dear woman. I daresay you have a future in color coordination.
ウチの家系は代々、探検家をしていてね。 俺も、爺様の作った地図「エオルゼア全図」に 霊災後の地形を加筆、修正するために各地を見てまわってる。 - もし、嬢ちゃんが俺の眼鏡にかなう働きができたなら、 大冒険にピッタリの秘境を教えてやろう。 危険な場所も多いが……嬢ちゃんなら望むところだよな？ 	 Far be it from me to brag, but the blood of explorers courses through my veins. My grandpapa drafted the first comprehensive map of Eorzea, and I've made it my life's work to revise it to reflect the changes brought about by the Calamity. - To this end, I've traveled all over Eorzea, and there's nary a place in the realm I've not seen with mine own eyes. Mayhap I could direct you to some of the more interesting locales I've explored─that is, if you're not afraid of a little danger.
「降神祭」のよき日に、大変お騒がせしております。 こんなに多くの馬とともに、新たな季節を迎えるなんて…… うふふ、なんて幸せなことでしょう！ 	 I come from the east of the East, m'lady. For us, Heavensturn is an affirmation of earthly pleasures. I came of age in the year of the dragon and...well! Still, I have great hopes for the year of the horse.
高地ラノシアの「ワンダラーパレス」……。 からくり仕掛けの装置が残る、不思議な場所だったわ。 怪我さえ治ったら、すぐにでも行きたいところね……。 	 I came here by way of the Wanderer's Palace. Oh, how you would love it there, a daring adventurer like you! There are automata contrived into the very walls...dozens of secret rooms there must be.
引き続き、クリスタル消失事件の処理にあたるよう 盟主さまから仰せつかったものでね。 しばらくは、フフルパくんと動き回ることになるよ。 	 Curious about our investigation's progress, are you? I'm afraid I have naught to share. - Y'shtola and I have our suspicions, of course, but we think it best to confirm them before delivering our report.
祖国からの逃避行では、食事にも事欠き、 体がすっかり弱り細ってしまった。 - 野良仕事で鍛えた頑丈な身体だけが、 自慢の種だったんだがな。 	 This land seems peaceful; its inhabitants kind. Mayhap they will accept us once we prove ourselves capable. - But how long will it take for our weakest to regain the strength to stand, much less to till the soil?
エオルゼアの噂は何度となく聞いていたが、 実際に訪れてみると、想像とは異なることばかりだのう。 	 Ugh. I can smell their stench on the wind even here.
植物も、建物も、洋服も……街のにおいも！ 何もかもがドマと違うから、面白いよ！ 	 Everything's so different! The buildings, the people─ Even the smells are different!
難民の移送は、任せておけ！ 結婚式の資金を稼ぐためにも、働くぞ！ 	 Ahhh, it's been too long─too godsdamned long since I've traveled 'cross Eorzea! I can't wait to take to the road again!
ドリルダさんは、マリアちゃんとお出かけに行ったわ。 「契約の剣」のこと、もっと怒るかと思ったけど…… ちょっと意外だったわね。 - ……さて、「武器怪盗ギルガメッシュ」の敗走と、 新たな敵「怪盗白仮面」の予告状！ 今度の記事も、盛り上がりそうね♪ - そうそう、予告状に書かれていた、 「るり色の乙女」についての調査も調べておくわ。 一体、どんな人なのかしら……。 	 Lady Durilda is taking the loss of the Treaty-Blade rather well, wouldn't you say? One moment she's utterly inconsolable, the next she's laughing like a child! - The thief is still out there, too─plotting his next crime, mocking the authorities all the while... - Frankly, I couldn't have asked for a better story! Here's hoping that the next chapter is just as entertaining, if not more so.
ちょっとしっかりしてよね。 大きいくせに、船酔いだなんて情けない！ 	 Two chum pails full already! How much more do you have in there?
船酔いが…うぇっぷ… 	 Oh, gods, make it end... I've got nothin' left to bring up...
村のみんなも言ってると思うが…… 霊災で潮の流れが変わって、漁獲高は激減さ。 なんとか、次の生き方を考えなくっちゃね。 	 The fish aren't biting in these parts, least not like they used to. World changes on you, you've got to change with it.
冒険者に大切なのは、夢と希望だぜ！ 夢とはすなわち億万長者！　希望とはすなわち一攫千金！ つまり、金っ！　世の中、金がすべてよ！ 	 The poets can romanticize it all they want, but a life without coin is no life at all.
イシュガルド防衛に 力を貸してくれ！ 	 Lend your blade to Ishgard!
あなたはもしや、ムソウサイさんといっしょにいたお侍さん……。 私はいつぞやに、高利貸から助けていただいた娘です。 あのときは、本当にありがとうございました。 - おかげさまで、病気のお父っつぁんは元気になりましたが、 恩人が亡くなったことを知り、お墓参りにきました。 	 Beggin' your pardon, but aren't you the samurai who was with Master Musosai? You and him saved me─from that vile moneylender. Thanks to you, I could go back to nurse Da back to health. - When I heard that Master Musosai had passed away, I came to pay my respects. May Thal rest his soul...
あんたは、あのときの……。 覚えていないだろうが、俺はイシュガルドで、 悪党の父親に悩まされ、身投げしようとしていた息子だよ。 - 親父の死後、俺は街を出て旅をしている。 ウルダハで、あの爺さんが死んだって聞いたもんで、 墓に手を合わせようと、ここに立ち寄ったんだ。 	 Y-You! You may not remember me, but my name is Honfraint. We met but briefly when you found me despairing of life under my ruthless father. - After that day, I left Ishgard behind and took to wandering the realm. Soon after arriving in Ul'dah, I learned Master Musosai had passed away. Though I did not learn his name until later, his words saved me; the least I can do is to offer my prayers in return.
これにて、一件落着。 悪の蔓延る世は栄えず！ 	 Our work here is done! One fewer evil afflicts the realm!
ムソウサイもいいけど、俺は弟子の冒険者推しさ。 名も知らない彼女に、夢中だよ！ 	 Master Musosai's great and all, but I'm rather partial to his pupil. Ah, I'd love to meet her one day...
いらっしゃい、シルバーバザー名物「ムソウサイ饅頭」はいかが？ 本場から取り寄せた「侍なりきりセット」もあるよ！ さあさあ、買った買った！ - って、アンタ買う気ないね？ だったら、ウルダハで講談を聴いてくるといい。 きっと欲しくなるはずだから……！ 	 Welcome to the Silver Bazaar! Might I interest you in our specialty, Musosai Dumplings? Or perhaps a set of authentic samurai attire, imported directly from the Far East. - ...You don't have a clue, do you? Take yourself to the Quicksand and listen to the tale─the Legend of Musosai. We'll see if you aren't clamoring for my wares then!
講談を聴いて、来たんだ 	 Mmmmmm, tastes like samurai...
お土産にいいわね… 	 I'll have a dozen.
