見敵必殺！ 	 Haven't missed yet. (The cliff, that is.)
おいっす 	 One, two... Nine, ten... Forty-one, forty-two...
ほいっす 	 Seven, eight...hm? Thirty-nine, forty...hm?
理想のテンポだ！ シェイシェイハ！！ 	 It's all in the wrist!
あ～肉うめぇ 	 Tastes like chicken, 'cause it is chicken!
あらよっと 	 You hear a scream from the palace?
ハラがへったーど！　ペコペコだーど！　何かくれだーど！ ヒトの作った食いモンは　あんまりウマくないけーど オイーラ　食べてやってもいいーど？ 	 Got any grub─feed, fare, grub? Thinking up good excuses to shirk my duties is hard work, yes, and hard work makes Bo Zu a hungry kobold.
ワガハイたち「第789洞穴団」は　コボルド族の中でも 愛想をつかされ　追い出されたモノたちが集まった いわゆーる　クズテツどもの掃き溜めなのですーぞ！ - でも　ワガハイは無能ではなく　あーえーてー働かないだーけ。 つまり　甘んじて　この境遇を受け入れているワケだからしーて ほかの者とは　ぜんぜん違うのですーぞ！ 	 The 789th is known for sloth and sluggardy, yes. But Bo Gu is different─unique, distinctive, different. - The others are incapable of work. Bo Gu could work, but chooses not to. See? Not the same. No, no, not at all.
労働なーど　愚か者のすることなのであーる。 だからワガハイのことは　より格調高く 「下等遊民」と　呼んでもらいたいのであーる！ 	 Lazy? I resent that remark─object, reject, resent. - Bo Bu simply believes that the measure of a kobold is not the number of shiny rocks in his pocket, but in his courage. Yes, courage and conviction! - Y-You don't think Zo Ga heard me just now, do you? No, no? Phew...
寝てなーいわー 仕事つらーいわー 	 Why work when sleep feels so good? Rest... Slumber... Zzz...
ぜんぶ　決めてーよ おまかせだーよ 	 Salt, saltpeter─what's the difference, anyway?
ヒトがこんなとこーに　いたーら いじめられるーよ……コワイーよ……。 早く立ち去った方がいいーよ……。 	 An overdweller? My boss Zo Ga doesn't take kindly to strangers sneaking around his personal property, nuh-uh, nuh-uh. - Yunz'll want to leave quickly, before we have an accident─a mishap, a misfortune, an accident, that sort of thing.
次の物資が届くまで、まだしばらくかかるっす。 早く肉が届かないと、恐ろしいことがおこるっす……。 元海賊の食欲、尋常じゃないっす……。 	 I jus' stands here and looks for the supply balloon. 'Tain't the food what's short but the fresh meat. Meat's important to a body on account of we being made of it or sumfin'.
自由気ままに海賊をやってたころは、 私が黒渦団に入ることになるなんて、想像もしなかったね。 ま、思う存分暴れていいっていうし、悪くないもんだ。 	 Arrr, it's been years since I gave up piratin' to serve an honest life in the Maelstrom. But between you an' me, there are still days when I can hear the sea callin' me home. An' I reckon I'm not the only one, aye.
ぐひーひ　あそぼーぜぇ 	 You come here why? Yes, yes, to die!
ナカヨーク　錬金しよーぜぇ 	 I'll boil you─cook you, simmer you, boil you!
た　助け～て！　誰～か！ 	 Paws off, you brutes─you beasts, you savages, you brutes!
ここーは　何もない採掘地だけーど 冒険者さーんが　僕たちのために働いてくれるなーら いろいろ　売ってあげてもいーよ？ 	 The 789th might not look like much, but we still manage to acquire some enticing trinkets from time to time. - We could sell them to you─yes, yes, we could─but what have you done for us? Hmm?
ともに戦いましょう！ エオルゼアのために！ 	 We fight as one! For all Eorzeans!
長老ときたら… 	 But, of courshe─hic!─the eldersh musht never know of thish!
あらよっと！ 	 Hic! Perhapsh I have partaken a bit more than─hic─ushual...
