この坂をトットコ登っていけば、 ソーム・アルの山頂に出られるくぽ！ 見晴らしもよくて、モグたちのお気に入りの場所くぽ～！ 	 If you follow this path all the way to the top, you'll come out on the summit of Sohm Al. There's such a lovely view up there, kupo!
モグに見とれて、くーぽくぽ！ 別に、恥ずかしがらなくてもいいくぽ。 地上にもこんな美人は、いないハズくぽ！ 	 Go on, stare at me if you must, kupo! I have grown accustomed to such gazes of unadulterated adoration. Creatures of my surpassing beauty are rare in the lands below, I should imagine...
このお花を見るくぽ、とってもきれいくぽ～！ モグモモが、心をこめて、大事に大事に育ててるくぽ♪ 	 Have you ever seen such a splendid flower, kupo? I water it every day─ I can't wait to see it grow even more!
物騒な格好をしてるくぽ？ それはそうくぽ、モグリンさまや、みんなを守るためくぽ！ モグリンさまの前では、失礼のないようにするくぽ～。 	 Are you surprised to see such a fierce-looking moogle, kupo? The Pomguard must defend Chieftain Moglin and all of Moghome. Mind your manners in front of the chieftain─and don't make him repeat himself.
どーもどーも、ゲージュツカのモグは、 「クポの実」を題材にしたいのですくぽ。 でも……どうしても、描く前に食べちゃうんですくぽ。 	 Have you come to admire my latest piece, kupo? I have been attempting to capture in oils the essence of the humble kupo nut, but inspiration is fleeting. ...Especially when the rumble in my belly overpowers the passion in my heart. 
ここは日当たりが良くて、植物たちを育てるのに絶好くぽ。 クポの木や、フワフワ浮草を栽培したり、 ドラゴン族から護りたい植物も、育ててるくぽ。 	 No other place in Moghome gets more nourishing sunlight, so this is the ideal place to grow kupo trees, cloud mallows, and any other precious plants we want to protect from the brutish skylords, kupo.
くぽぽ……モグミルは、ヒトが作った金属をたくさん集めて、 それから、それから……えーっと…… みんなに自慢するくぽ！ 	 I'm gonna build the biggest collection of shiny landlord treasures any moogle has ever seen, kupo! And then, I'll bask in the envy of everyone in Moghome!
モグたちはここで、ドラゴン族の動きを監視しているくぽ。 邪竜様が咆哮を発してから、一時も目が離せないくぽ。 	 Mognell and I are here to keep an eye on the dragons, kupo. Ever since Nidhogg roared, they've been up to no good.
ここから見ると、下にいるドラゴン族なんか、 クポの実くらい小さくて、モグにも倒せそうくぽ！ ……でも、今日は調子が悪いから、今度にするくぽ。 	 The dragons look as small as kupo nuts from up here, and even I can crush a kupo nut, kupo! I'd go down and squish them, but I'm a little tired today. Maybe tomorrow...
おっきな建物を建てたり、ピカピカの金属を作ったり、 ヒトって、とっても興味深いくぽ！ 	 When I see all the marvelous structures and glittering tools the landlords made, I can't help but want to know more about them, kupo!
モグは、お花が大好きくぽ。 いつか、この雲海をお花でいっぱいにして、 地上からも、お客さんを招きたいくぽ。 	 Flowers are one of the most precious things that grow here, kupo. One day, I want to grow a whole field of them, and invite people from the surface to come gaze on their beauty.
モグは、モグモグホームのお花の水やり担当くぽ。 多すぎてもダメ、少なすぎてもダメ…… 水やりも、なかなか奥が深いくぽ。 	 I have one of the most important and difficult jobs in Moghome: watering the flowers, kupo! You can't put too much, and you can't put too little─truly, it is an art form!
この橋を渡った先には、アサー天空廊があるくぽ。 そこでは、友達のモグモンが門番をしてるくぽ。 辺りはドラゴン族だらけで、大変そうくぽ。 	 Continue down this road and you'll get to Asah. My friend Mogmont's guarding the entrance there─it takes a courageous pom to stand guard with all the skylords about, kupo!
今日も「聖女シヴァ像」は、きれいくぽ。 モグの目が黒いうちは、像を汚すことは許さないくぽ。 	 The statue stands as serene as ever, kupo. As long as my pom remains upright, I'll let none defile these sacred grounds.
ここは、聖竜様の領域、アサー天空廊くぽ。 邪竜様配下の暴れん坊を近づかせないよう、 じっと睨みを利かせているくぽ！ 	 This is Asah, part of the great wyrm Hraesvelgr's domain. Nidhogg's meddlesome minions would like nothing more than to burn it down to rubble, so I must always remain diligent in my lookout duties, kupo!
モーグリ族の集落を訪れることになるとはね。 黒衣森にも、このような場所があるのだろうか？ 	 I did not expect our travels to bring us to a moogle village. I wonder if a similar settlement exists somewhere within the Twelveswood...
イライラする豚どもだ……。 いや、不細工なビーバーに見えなくもないな……。 	 The Fury take these ridiculous flying rodents!
……か、可愛い……。 	 So exceedingly fluffy...
雲上のモーグリ族も、森のモーグリ族と似て、 エーテルの扱いに長けていますね。 姿を隠すことが上手いのも、そのためでしょう。 	 Just as their cousins in the Twelveswood, these Moghome moogles excel in the manipulation of aether. There are few who could detect them if they chose not to be detected.
こうして言葉を交わすのは、善王の件以来となりますね。 戦勝祝賀会の際には、加勢できず申し訳ありませんでした。 しかし、我らの使命は幻術皇の護衛……どうか、ご理解ください。 	 Warrior of Light. We have not spoken since the trouble with Good King Moggle Mog, and I would proffer my apologies. Had I not been bound by my duty to protect the Elder Seedseer, I would have stood with you against your accusers in Ul'dah.
カヌ・エ様は、私の命の恩人……。 ゆえにこの命に代えても、お守りする…… ただ、それだけです。 	 I owe the Elder Seedseer my life. My duty to protect her surpasses all other concerns.
雲の上にお仲間がいるなんて、本当にびっくりクポ！ 	 How exciting to have relatives in the clouds, kupo!
……私が感じたシヴァの心は…… すべては、幻想だったというのか……。 	 What false god is this Shiva? What manner of phantom have I welcomed into my heart...?
坊ちゃんの子守は任せたぞ。 俺のことなら、心配しなくてもいい。 しばし、邪竜との睨み合いを楽しむとするさ。 	 Pray return to the young lord's side, Warrior of Light. Do not waste your concern on me─I have had long practice locking gazes thus with the wrathful Nidhogg.
君も飛べるくぽ？ 	 A flying landlord!?
警備中くぽ！ 	 You like my axe? You can't have it, kupo!
雲海の空を舞うことにかけては、 我ら竜の右に出る存在などいない。 	 Your flying machines are clever, but a wyvern's mastery of the winds will never be surpassed by mortal inventions.
くたびれたくぽ… 	 I...I can't feel my pom, kupo.
少し休まないと キツいくぽぉ 	 I'll let you guys finish the rest.
あとはみんなに 任せたくぽぉ 	 We'll never finish at this rate.
か、体がついて こないくぽ… 	 I'm not going to make it, kupo...
よ、酔ったみたいくぽ… 	 The world just keeps on spinning and spinning, kupo...
クラクラするくぽぉ 	 I think I'm going to be sick, kupo...
や、やられたくぽ… 	 I should've known it was too good to be true...
まんまとダマされたくぽぉ 	 Revenge <cough> will be ours, kupo!
えいやっ！　ほらさっ！ 	 Hey! Umph...wait for me, kupo!
立派な像くぽ～ 	 I want to see if I can reach the top...
見惚れてサボるなくぽー！ 	 Didn't Mogek want us back soon?
モグジンは どこ行ったくぽ？ 	 Have you seen Master Mogzin? He owes me kupo nuts!
いい気持ちくぽ…ぐぅ 	 Ah... That feels good...
広場の外は危険くぽ！ 	 Step outside Bahrr Lehs at your own peril, kupo!
とっても難しいくぽ… 	 So hot... So tired...
修復団は 我々が守らねば！ 	 The Mogmenders are safe under our protection!
気合いが足りん！ もっと力を込めるんだ！ 	 Come on, put your pom into it!
そこはもっと丁寧に！ 	 No, not there, not there!
そこ、歪んでるくぽ！ 	 Hmmm... That doesn't look right...
…水平は取れてるくぽ？ 	 Does that look level to you, kupo?
綺麗な広場だ、悪くない… 	 This place is quite...pleasant.
ここは暖かいくぽ…ぐぅ 	 So warm, kupo. It's like there's a fire in your belly.
みんなで遊ぶくぽー♪ 	 I can just lose myself in the music, kupo!
これはなかなか難しいな 	 Is it twirl, jump, twirl or twirl, twirl, jump?
踊るモーグリかわいい… 	 Have you ever seen something so heartwarming?
ヒトと共にあって、 なお心地よいとはな… 	 Perhaps this arrangement with the sons of man is not so bad. 
ドラゴンと一緒で、 これほど安らぐとはね… 	 To think working with dragons could be so pleasurable.
愉快な舞だ、悪くない… 	 I envy the grace with which they move.
一緒に踊るくぽー♪ 	 Won't you dance with me, kupo?
陽気な舞だ、悪くない… 	 These playful movements...they intrigue me.
よ、容赦ないくぽ 	 Foolish...fool...
ぽんぽん…ダメ… 	 Not the pom...
…スヤァ 	 I'm too young to kupo...
