コロセウムはウルダハで一番人気のある娯楽のひとつだ。 歴代の剣闘士チャンピオンたちは、 皆、絶大な地位や名声を得て、歴史にその名を残している。 - 「アラミゴの猛牛」ラウバーンをはじめ、 「赤の剣士」グレインファル、 「ナルザルの双剣」アルディスとリーヴォルド……。 - 僕もこれから華々しいデビューを飾り、 彼らのように、のしあがっていくつもりさ！ 	 Every man, woman, and child in Ul'dah knows the names of the great Coliseum champions. - The Bull of Ala Mhigo, the Hellfire Phoenix, the Twin Swords of Nald'thal... - And one day, me─the Garnet Gladiator!
どこが壊れてるのかしら… 	 But I followed the designs to the letter...
ウルダハ製の服はとても質がいいんだ。 やはり僕のような一流の者には、一流の価値が分かるんだよな。 	 I fancy myself a man of distinguishing tastes, and I can tell you with all certainty that the quality of Ul'dahn garments is unmatched. There are simply none finer.
採掘師は体が資本だからな、 働いたあとはきっちり休むことにしてるんだ。 いい石が見つかった日は特別酒が美味いぜ。 	 Minin's as much about restin' as it is about workin'. That is to say, a hard day's labor demands a hard night's drinkin'.
最近、なんだか都市の様子がおかしいと思うのよ。 銅刃団や不滅隊が、殺気立っているし、 何かあったのかしら、怖いわ……。 	 Is it just me, or are there more soldiers on the streets of late? Everywhere I go, I feel as though I'm being watched. It's downright unsettling, I tell you.
例の「戦勝祝賀会」以降、突如として潰れる商会が多い。 砂蠍衆から、圧力がかかっているとしか思えんよ。 政変があったという噂は、もしや本当なのだろうか……。 	 Since the victory feast, one consortium after another has been going under, and with nary any warning. Only the Syndicate has the power to do such a thing, but to what end? Could the rumors of revolution be true?
貧民どもを連れてくんなよ？ 	 Don't you go bringing any of that rabble in here.
さっさと行きな… 	 Ain't naught fer ye here but a knife in the gut.
まだかー？ 	 I wouldn't put it past this lot.
くず鉄、くず鉄… 	 You don't think some- one stole it, do you?
安い労働者はいないかねぇ 	 No. None of these will do. They're all too old.
どうかお恵みを… 	 Alms for the poor!
いたた… 	 Please, milady. I cannot even walk.
この通りは注意しろよ 	 It's best you keep one eye on your purse.
………… 	   ...
廃棄物が増えたわね 	 Just toss it with the rest of the rubbish.
誰も気にしねーだろ 	 Where do you want these, ma'am?
……庶民が話しかけないでくれる？ 	 I do not converse with commoners...
な、なんで来ないんだろう？ も、も、もしかして、他の男と……ま、まさかッ！？ - イエロー・ムーンちゃああああああん！ 	 Why hasn't she come yet? Is there...another man? No... She wouldn't. She couldn't. Not her... Not my... - Yelloooooow Moooooon!!!
く～るくるくる… 	 Distant worlds together, miracles from realms beyond...♪
トントンよっと… 	 One, and two, and three, and four, and...
裁縫師ギルドは、流行の発信地なんです。 ウルダハだけでなく、エオルゼア中から注目されるので、 下手な服を発表するわけにはいきません。 	 All of Eorzea foams at the mouth whenever a new Sunsilk design is revealed. My colleagues and I are always under enormous pressure.
いや～ん、ダメダメッ！　服のコーデが決まらな～い！ これじゃ、ダーリンとラブラブできないよぅ～！ イエロー・ムーン、困っちゃむ～ん！ 	 No, no, no! This doesn't match at all! Oh, I can't let him see me like this. What's a girl to do?
特別に仕立ててもらったの 	 I had it embroidered with Thavnairian silk.
ブランドショップ「サンシルク」で 新作の服が売られてたけど、私には手が出ないわ……。 	 I once dreamed I was buying all the latest fashions at Sunsilk Tapestries─gowns of silk and goldspun and ermine. But life has killed the dream I dreamed.
ステキ～ 	 Oh, how wonderful!
ここが流行の発信地、裁縫師ギルドよ。 ファッションの世界って、華々しくて ちょっとおもしろそうよね。 	 I can't wait to see what magnificent designs the weavers will produce next! Just look at the variety of fabrics at their disposal!
こちらは裁縫師ギルドです 	 The Weavers' Guild is this way, ma'am.
裁縫師ギルドのマスター、レドレント・ローズさん…… その作品は大胆にして繊細、伝統的にして革新的。 まさに一流のファションリーダーって奴ね！ 	 Redolent Rose is master of the Weavers' Guild. His work is true genius. Bold yet delicate, traditional yet innovative. There is none more fit for the job than he.
あ～あ、みんなオシャレしやがって……。 俺なんか、この銅刃団の装備が一張羅だぜ！？ ん？……なんか臭うか？ 	 All these pretty people in their fancy clothes. <sigh> Fanciest thing I've ever worn is this suit of mail, which─<sniff> <sniff>─is beginnin' to smell...
情けねぇなぁ！ 	 You 'old your drink 'bout as good as a Lala.
うぃ～っ… 	 Did I...win...?
う～ん… 	 Won't know what I'm lookin' for till I find it.
ふんふ～ん♪ 	 Do you even know what we're looking for?
そこの現場が大変でな… 	 I's a sack o' coin with yer name on it, love.
…ひっく 	 Jusslemme die herein peece... Ulp!
金のチェーンは… 	 What about gold chains?
…ふぅ 	 I'll never finish this, will I?
…話しかけないでね 	 Would you mind stepping back?
彫キキキ★ガガ※※ 	 WeLcOmmmm★※～
473番です 	 Drawer 473.
新作モチーフの発表です 	 There is nothing more beautiful than a woman with diamonds in her eyes and on her hands!
いいなぁ… 	 In half a bell, she'll take her break, and then I'll─
せいやっ！ 	 Hyah! Hyah! Hyah!
切っ先まで集中しろ！ 	 Keep your shields up! Again!
こっちはコロセウムの控え室だ 	 This is the entrance to the hypogeum.
はぁ、はぁ… 	 I should have joined the Weavers' Guild...
肘が下がり過ぎだ 	 Did you even try to hit him!?
今日も熱いカードだねぇ 	 And what, exactly, does action smell like?
早くしないと売り切れだ！ 	 We have seats so close, you can smell the action!
まぁそう焦んなよぉ 	 See? I thought we was 'ere to drink!
これが名物コロセウムか… 	 So this is the world- famous Coliseum...
ウルダハって野蛮ね 	 Removing the hunt from battle... How brutish.
いい薬にな～れ… 	 Bubble, bubble, toil and...and...and bubble?
つまりこの配合は… 	 Omit even one of the ingredients, and the results would be fatal.
なるほどね… 	 I see! Two eyes of newt and three toes of frog!
どんな疫病でも治せる新薬を作るのが、僕の夢さ。 そしたらみんなが買って、僕はお金持ちになれるだろ？ 	 It is my life's work as an alchemist to brew an elixir of such potency that a single sip will cure any ailment. Why, people would shower me with gil for such a potion, would they not?
まずは濁水よ 	 Yes, but we must first remove the stagnation.
Zzz… 	 But there must be a way! There must!
また実験で夜更かし～？ 	 No manner of alchemy can bring her back, Father.
熱はあるのか？ 	 When, exactly, did these episodes begin?
うちの子が風邪ひいちゃって 	 It's my son. He's been having terrible night fits.
ほんとに～？ 	 You're surely not serious...are you!?
惚れ薬を調合するの！ 	 If I cannot talk my way into his heart, I'll poison my way into it!
あ、あれ～？ 	 What was it we were searching for again?
静粛にするよう 	 You will watch your tongue whilst in the Royal Promenade.
ここから先は王宮よ 	 What business would Her Grace have with the likes of you?
ワシが考えるに… 	 If you ask me, I say to the hells with them!
なるほど… 	 I wasn't asking you...
ちょっと休んでいくか 	 This heat is unbearable!
ふぃ～ 	 And a man cannot work with his throat dry.
安売りだ！ 	 Four found dead on Pearl Lane! Accident or foul play!? Read it here!
さあいらっしゃい！ 	 Is it skins you seek? Or perhaps silks?
まだかなぁ～ 	 Were there no better seats? I can't see a thing!
銀鉱の質がイマイチなんだ 	 That last shipment was full of impurities.
採掘師ギルドに文句言うかぁ 	 Will you lodge a com- plaint with the guild?
あ～あ、こんなところで見張りをしてないで、 コロセウムの観戦に行きたいぜ、まったく。 	 Would it kill them to station me a few yalms closer to the action? Gods forbid I actually get to enjoy the tourney after all my hard work...
またナナワ銀山？ 	 Hah! You couldn't afford me, you poxy-arsed fool.
ま～た勝手に貼って… 	 Damned vandals! I'll never get this off!
…フン 	 Come, fight me on the bloodsands like a man.
お手並み拝見だな 	 You wouldn't last thirty heartbeats, dog.
ここから先は行動に気をつけろ 	 One misstep and it's to Stonesthrow with you!
え～いいな～！ 	 He'll truly buy you any necklace you want?
買っちゃった～！ 	 And I only need dine with him at his estate!
素晴らしいアイデアだ 	 Why wouldn't you just ride a chocobo?
次の作品のイメージはね… 	 I have an idea for a two-wheeled cart you pedal with your legs.
まだまだ行けるわよ！ 	 So which one did you end up choosing?
また買いすぎちゃった！ 	 I just couldn't decide between the red or the blue...so I bought both!
ひぃ～ 	 Any time now, dearest!
ピカピカ◎彫金師ギルド☆デス 	 WeLcOmE★tO★tHe GoLdSmItHs'★gUiLd!
よくできとるな… 	 Don't these contrap- tions ever blink!?
ここから先は政庁層だ 	 The Hustings Strip lies above.
この先はウルダハ上層エリア。 主に貴族や富裕層が生活する場所だ。 我ら銀冑団の目が光っていることを忘れるな。 	 Beyond lies the upper tier of Ul'dah, home to nobles and aristocrats alike. Know that here the eyes of the Sultansworn are upon you at all times.
まぁ、いいじゃない 	 What other choice do we have?
東アルデナード商会が… 	 The East Aldenard Trading Company!? Never!
仕入れを急いだほうがいい 	 You must put past differences aside.
そしたら召使いがなぁ… 	 And she ran out of the lord's chambers wearing naught but her knickers!
ウフフ 	 That new maidservant!? No! Truly?
我ら銀冑団は、ナナモ女王陛下と王家を守護する近衛である！ ……それにしても、腹がへった。 	 We Sultansworn have vowed to put the safety of the sultana and her house before all else! But I sure could go for a sandwich...
下の噴水広場はゴールドコートといって 昔は王立の舞踏会場だったんだ。 	 Ahem... Speaking of colors, though... The fountain and plaza below are known as the Gold Court. In former days, many a royal gala graced its stones.
昔は銀冑団っていやあ、ウルダハ最強の精鋭だったんだけどな。 今じゃ、王家とともにすっかりショボくれちまって、 銅刃団みたいな自警団に後れをとる始末さ。 	 Time was, the Sultansworn were the finest warriors in Ul'dah. But they've since grown as feeble and flaccid as the royal family itself. - <spit> Hells, they'll not even be a match for the Brass Blades before long.
錬金術の研究をしていると、寝るのも忘れて没頭してしまうよ。 ……そうだ、ひらめいた！ 寝なくても平気になる薬を錬成すればいいんだ！ 	 <sigh> Just mentioning the treacherous heat causes fatigue... And my passion for alchemy is such that I oft forget to sleep. - And so I have resolved to concoct a magical elixir─a potable that shall imbue the imbiber with the energy of a bull, red with waking rage! Sleep, begone!
この扉の向こうは「フロンデール歩廊」。 その奥にあるのが「錬金術師ギルド」だ。 フロンデール歩廊には、我ら銀冑団の総長室もあるぞ。 	 Beyond these doors lies Scholars' Walk, where you will find Frondale's Phrontistery and the Heart of the Sworn.
調合はもっと慎重に！ 	 Be careful not to over- stimulate the reagents!
薬ばかり作っているように思えるかもしれないけど、 ここでは繊維の染料や、蒸留酒なんかも 研究しているのよ？ 	 I realize what it looks like to the untrained eye. No more than making medicine, day in and day out, right? But what if I told you I mix dyes as well? No, I...I suppose that's just as boring.
ふむふむ… 	 Can we not use this water?
ロロリト様ったらね… 	 Lord Lolorito is naught but a dirty old pinchgil!
さすがですわ～ 	 Lower your voice! One of his birds might hear!
新薬開発は、時間との戦いだよ。 ひとつ当てれば莫大な利益があるけど、 同業者が先に発表したら無駄になっちまう。 	 
フーン 	 But it'll cost you!
ふーん 	 Might be we could find you one...
大きなルビーの原石がね… 	 I'm looking to buy a ruby...a large ruby.
よっ… 	 Just let me get a good handle on her.
持ってくかぁ 	 You ready yet?
また実験失敗したの？ 	 Botch the synthesis again, did you?
はぁ……ミラさん、今日も凛々しくて美しいぜ……。 恋人とか、いるのかなぁ……。 	 The First Sword's a beauty, ain't she? But don't let her looks deceive ye─she'll cleave a man clean in half if she has a mind to do so.
王家だ何だと、ふんぞり返っちゃいるが、 やつらの台所事情は厳しいもんだ。 豪商のほうがよっぽどいい生活してるぜ。 	 The royals strut about as though the sun shone out of their arses, but I hear life in the palace isn't nearly so sweet as they'd have us believe. - Word is most merchants lead far fatter lives than any of the sultansblood.
錬金術師ギルドに入っても、 教えてくれるのは基礎くらいだ。 - そもそもギルドマスターのセヴェリアンさんからして 奇人変人っていう噂だからなぁ。 薬の配合率は、先輩の仕事を見て盗め、ってことか。 	 It's been months since I've joined the guild, yet they've taught me only the most basic alchemy. - It's possible that seeing only my own questionable alchemical concoctions has influenced my taste in color palettes... 
もう守護天節の時期なんだな。 例年は怠け者が早退の理由に使うくらいだったが、 今年はずいぶん大掛かりな催しをするようだ。 	 All Saints' Wake, eh? Just another sorry excuse for laggards and layabouts to shirk their duties, if you ask me.
ザナラーンには豊富な鉱物資源が眠ってるからな。 それをどう金になる装飾品に加工するか…… 彫金師の腕の見せどころってやつだぜ。 	 As much as I enjoy the creative aspect of goldsmithing─drawing out the hidden potential of Eorzea's natural bounty and so forth─I understand that it is first and foremost a means to an end. What use is a masterpiece if no one will purchase it?
時代は変わる……。 エオルゼアも随分と様変わりしました。 老兵は死なず、ただ消え去るのみ……ですなぁ。 	 Times change, but more quickly. I would speak most untruly if I said I recognized much of Eorzea these days. Here I am now, an old soldier─I've missed my death and must find another way out...
「衣食足りて礼節を知る」って言いますけど、 やはり服装に気を遣うくらい生活に余裕がないと、 人の心は豊かになりませんよね。 	 They say the clothes make the woman. Have you come looking to be remade, adventurer?
ここはナル神を祀っている、ミルバネス礼拝堂です。 第七霊災で、中の柱が随分と壊れてしまったため、 現在修復中となっております……。 	 Milvaneth Sacrarium, dedicated to the worship of Nald, was extensively damaged during the Calamity. Repairs continue even to this day, to the great inconvenience of our adherents.
注目銘柄は青燐水だぞ 	 Every merchant worth his salt is watchin' ceruleum.
今回の派手な立ち回りといい、 正義を主張する最新の予告状といい……。 「怪盗白仮面」のファンは、いっそう増えそうね。 - 最近は「ミスリルアイ」宛に、 「怪盗白仮面」へのファンレターが届くこともあるのよ？ それだけ、私の記事が注目されてるってことだけどね！ - ……さてと、うかうかしていられないわ。 予告された「ウルダハの秘宝」について、調べておかなくちゃ！ 	 Say what you want about our many-faced thief, he hasn't lost his flair for the dramatic. With these promises of justice, doubtless he's won over a whole new legion of fans. - Did you know that the Mythril Eye sometimes gets fan letters addressed to the many-faced thief? Just goes to show how my articles have won over the hearts of the people! - Now, as much as I'd love to stand here and chat all night, I've got some relics to research!
そのやる気、買った！ 	 Fair enough, fair enough...
あんた、二代目マスク・ザ・ブルーじゃないか？ 俺、マスクカーニバルの大ファンなんだ。 ずっと応援してるから、がんばってくれよな！ 	 You... You're Azuro the Second! I mean, I should know─the Masked Carnivale is practically my second home. Screamed myself hoarse the last time I watched one of your matches!
ウチのファミリーに「仕事」を頼みたいのか？ そうでないなら、とっとと失せな……。 	 The family ain't interested unless you got a business proposal, pal. Got it? Good, now get the hells outta here.
ようこそ、お姉さん。 どれも新生祭に合わせて、心を込めて創った作品たちだ。 眺めていってもらえると嬉しいよ。 	 Please browse my exhibit at your leisure. Each and every piece has been lovingly crafted in honor of the Rising.
気鋭の彫金師ジャ・ベン・ティアの路上個展だ。 ぜひ、こいつの作品をじっくり見ていってほしい。 	 I'm pleased to present the works of J'bhen Tia, the brightest new star in the world of glass art. His artistry and craftsmanship will astound and inspire you!
このガラス絵の逸話 私、好きなのよ… 	 I just adore this stained glass piece.
なんと精細な…！ 	 Such amazing detail!
