はぁ…ひぃ…ふぅ… 	 (Help me...)
ふん、まだまだ 	 Right after you, lass.
もう諦めなよ 	 Why won't ye quit, ye bloody sea cow!?
「漁師ギルド」では、漁獲量の卸値の調整、 港湾施設の整備など、漁師個人では解決できない事柄を、 協力して解決しているんだ。 - 最近じゃあ、都市外から来た漁師も受け入れてるよ。 勝手に漁場を荒らされたら、たまったもんじゃないし…… それに技術交流にも繋がるからね。 	 Without the Fishermen's Guild, the pullers wouldn't have a place to gather and discuss issues like setting a wholesale price for fish or organizing repairs for waterfront facilities. - And since we started taking in foreign fisherfolk, the existence of the guild is especially important. Aside from teaching these outsiders the ways of Limsa's waters, we all get a chance to learn new tricks from one another.
次どこ行きます～？ 	 But what of all the Qiqirn?
ソルトストランドはどうだい？ 	 There be fish aplenty off the Salt Strand.
漁師ギルドは、エオルゼアで最大級の 大きな生け簀を持っていましてね。 いっつも、採れたお魚いっぱいなんです。 - 釣果がまったくないときは、そこでこっそり…… いえ、なんでもありませんよ。 	 Our guild 'as a fine collection o' live fish in the pool there. It's always squirmin' with the latest catch, ye see. - An' when the sea's been unkind with 'er bounty, I just drop a line in all sneaky-like an'─ Ahem, fine weather we're 'avin', ain't it?
お魚さん、来い来い～ 	 Call me that again and this bucket goes on your head.
ほっほっほっ… 	 A little more over here, lemoncake.
今日こそ勝つ… 	 The Navigator smiles upon me today!
押されてんぞー！？ 	 She's merely laughin' at your paltry catch!
うふふふ… 	 Well then, milord, what is your assessment?
うちの船に来ないか？ 	 I love ye! Come and be me saltwife!
も…もう少し 	 I's a...a bodice assessor wiv Mealvaan's Gate.
俺は、外洋交易船「オライオン号」の船長アルドスキフ。 雇われ船長を続けて、早うんじゅうねん…… もう雇われ船長としては、ベテランといえるな。 - いざ船を買うほどの金がたまったところで、霊災だ…… さすがに、船主の船を奪うような形は気が引けてな。 未だに、船主のためにがんばってるのさ。 	 I'm the hired captain of the Orion. She's a fine vessel, true, but a hired captain can love his ship only as much as a paid bride can love her betrothed. - A ship of my own is all I've ever wanted. Was a gil away from buying one when the Calamity struck, but how can I complain when so many lost so much more?
きゅるきゅる 	    ???
きゅるるるぅ 	 Hisss!
積荷を書いてください 	 I am going to need you to sign this import slip.
ここ「メルヴァン税関公社」では、 海都「リムサ・ロミンサ」に入港する船舶を検査し、 違法物の調査や、関税の徴収にあたってますにゃ。 - 港湾設備を整備し、航海の安全を守るためには、 なにかとお金がかかりますから、すべての船乗りに 平等で負担してもらうというわけですにゃ。 	 All that would pass into Limsa Lominsa must first pass through Mealvaan's Gate. We levy excises and disallow contraband for the welfare of the market. - Trade can only be free when buyers possess the necessary assurances. Without the rule of law, the streets would be overrun by traffickers and cutthroats.
食料品の輸出入には、いつも気を遣いますね。 何せ、食料品というのは、悪くなりやすいですから…… おかげでいつも忙しいですが、やりがいはあります。 	 Being a customs officer often feels like a thankless job. On any given day, a dozen strangers will accuse you of high-sea robbery. I must constantly remind myself that what I do is for the good of the nation.
困りますぅ 	 How about you take a crate for yourself?
没収だってぇ！？ 	 Those dream flowers cost us a fortune!
ピカピカもりもりっちゃ 	 Five box o' sparklies... Ten sack o' shinies...
シュコォ…おけんさドキドキ 	 Longstand makes gobbie- legs shake and quake.
我らの商品、は傭兵、だ 	 Have you...bigger quill?
訓練中だ、静かにな 	 Keep your voice low, lest you disturb the summons.
臨検の作戦は… 	 An undercover intelli- gencer? It might just work.
おとり作戦とか 	 What if we were to plant an assessor on the ship?
はいはい宝石50箱っと… 	 Could you be any more specific, sir?
はぁぁぁ！ 	 Very good! He's located the milkroot!
現在、巴術による積み荷検査の訓練中だ。 集中が必要なので、悪いが話しかけないでいただきたい。 	 Please, not another word! If I am ever to become an official assessor, this training exercise must be the focus of my full and undivided attention!
受付は、この先です！ 	 The reception hall lies straightaway.
リムサ・ロミンサ領の港を使用する船は、 積み荷検査と、関税支払が義務付けられています。 まずは、このメルヴァン税関公社で受付をお願いします。 	 All vessels that make use of Limsa Lominsa's ports must submit to a cargo inspection and pay the duties incurred. Please direct all inquiries and complaints to the front desk of Mealvaan's Gate.
どうした？ 「溺れた海豚亭」に着いたら、 マスターの「バデロン」に話をするんだぞ。 	 Were you able to find the Drowning Wench? Baderon there will help get you started here in Limsa Lominsa.
ここは総合タワー「ミズンマスト」の最下層、 防御施設「ブルワークホール」だ。 - 「ブルワーク」ってのは、 船のフチにある波よけの鋼板のことさ。 ここは敵という波を食い止める、最後の砦ってことさ。 	 This is Bulwark Hall, the lowest level of the Mizzenmast. In case you aren't familiar with the nautical term, a bulwark is the plating that prevents waves from swamping a ship's decks.  - Replace “waves” with “hordes of howling beastmen,” and you'll get an idea of the purpose for which this chamber exists.
ヒャ～キッツイぜ… 	 I needs me a scrag to do me scrag work.
♪ヨホホィ嵐に負けねぇ♪ 	 Used to be we had Qiqirn swab the decks.
キョキョルン、しょうばい、大好きっちゃ。 ちゃりちゃり、もりもり、集めるっちゃ。 みせみせ、もつもつ、夢夢っちゃ。 	 Kyokyoroon select best selection, priceless prices for shoppers to shop! Customer's custom is truest truth!
シュコォ……シュコォ…… わなし　い～ゴブリン　スウィ～トニクス！ おてがみ　い～ぱい　かきかき　いそがしの！ 	 Pshhh... Shkohhh... Sweetnix write many letters, but never find right words!
実、に見事、だ 	 Two score blood sausages. Raw.
この広場の東西に連なる国際街商通りは、 交易商人が集う、商いの中心地だ。 - 七つの海を渡ってきた商品を 目利きの商人が、ところ狭しと並べてるぜ。 店をのぞいて、異国の風を感じるのもオツなもんさ。 	 The east and west arms of Hawkers' Alley hold within their bustling embrace all manner of wondrous wares and exotic commodities. - Our merchants keep their shelves well stocked and their prices reasonable─spend but a moment to browse the selections, and you will find much at which to marvel!
東西の国際街商通りをつなぐ広場だ。 遠方より渡ってきた交易商人も多いのでな、 黒渦団が監視にあたっているわけだ。 	 This here's Hawkers' Round, where East meets West. The place bustles with buyers and sellers both.
私は「ブルゲール商会」で 副会長を務めるバンゴ・ザンゴ。 悪いが勤務中でね……。 	 Just because I, Bango Zango, preside as second chair over the Brugaire Consortium, does not mean I have the time to consort with all and sundry.
ふむ……やはりコスタ・デル・ソルに比べると、 魚の品揃えはリムサ・ロミンサのほうが豊富ですね。 - しかし、都市から輸送する手間を考えると、 屋敷で漁師を雇った方がいいかもしれません……。 こちらのギルドで、漁師の斡旋はやっているのでしょうか？ 	 Well, I must admit that the variety of the catch found in Costa del Sol pales in comparison to the teeming fish markets of Limsa Lominsa. - And if one were to consider the dilemmas inherent in transporting freshly caught cargo from the city, it may prove wiser to employ a fisherman directly at the manor. Do you happen to know if the guild here is willing to hire out individuals talented with line and lure?
ようこそ、リムサ・ロミンサへ！ ここ総合タワー「ミズンマスト」は、 リムサ・ロミンサの中枢なんです。 - 「冒険者ギルド」に、飛空艇の発着所、 さらに、さらに政庁「アドミラルブリッジ」まで 重要な施設が、ぎ～っしり詰まってますから！ 	 Welcome to the heart of Limsa Lominsa─the Mizzenmast! - It houses the airship landing, the Adventurers' Guild, and─at the very top─the command room of the Admiral, from where she keeps a watchful eye over Lominsan air, land, and sea.
ようこそ、リムサ・ロミンサへ！ 「ミズンマスト」を上り下りするには、 あちらの「クロウズリフト」をお使いくださいね。 - 変な名前のリフトだと思いますか、思いますよね？ この名は、なんとマストのてっぺんにある見張り台 「クロウズネスト」に、ちなんでいるのです！ 	 The Crow's Lift will carry you up and down the tower as fast as the crow flies. - You need only speak with Grehfarr and tell him where you wish to go!
国際街商通りも、ようやく賑わいが戻ってきた。 港湾施設も一通り復旧して、外つ国の商人たちも この港に戻ってきたからな。 	 The reopened ports got the foreign merchants flowin' in, then the merchants got the people flowin' in, an' now 'Awkers' Alley is overflowin' again!
この先は海都「リムサ・ロミンサ」の主門、 「ゼファー陸門 (りくもん)」さ。 そこをくぐれば、中央ラノシアへ出るぞ。 - ここらは、ゼファーと呼ばれる 穏やかな西風が心地よく吹く場所だからね。 「ゼファー・ドリフト」と呼ばれているよ。 	 Beyond the great Zephyr Gate of Limsa Lominsa lie the midlands of La Noscea. - The gentle wind that passes through the gate is said to be the sweet breath of the gods, carrying life and fortune.
ここは「八分儀広場 (はちぶんぎひろば)」。 今や航海には必須になっている道具、 「八分儀」の発明者、ジョバンニ・ノーノを称えた記念公園さ。 - エーテライトも設置されて、都市にとっても 冒険者にとっても重要な場所になっているよ。 	 Ever wonder why this courtyard was called the Octant? It was named for the navigation tool invented by the famous Jovanni Gnonno. - With the aetheryte placed here at its center, the Octant has always been one of Limsa's busiest hubs.
商売とはいえ、故郷以外の都市を訪れるのは楽しいですわね。 故郷ウルダハとは違う、独特の魅力を感じます。 こういうの、異国情緒っていうのかしら？ 	 I may be here on business, but I do so enjoy visiting foreign ports. Limsa Lominsa has a character that is quite unlike that of my native Ul'dah. The lure of the exotic is indeed irresistible.
情けねぇぞ～！！ 	 Is them buzzards I see a-circlin'?
♪ヨホホィ分捕れ乗っ取れ♪ 	 Swabbin' be a rat's job, if ye ask me.
アタマ冷えたか～！？ 	 Tell us where ye hid the loot, ye rotten scrag!
遅いぞ～！ 	 Like if I sat on yer back, ox-breath?
ほぁ… 	 I's lookin' for a fight!
提督と面会したい 	 I'm looking for the Admiral!
てっぺんに行けるのか？ 	 I'm looking for the custom house.
ほら、行くぞ 	 When I said I'd follow you to the ends of the realm, I didn't think we'd need to stop and ask directions.
詳しく教えてくれ 	 Where in the Navigator's name are the airships!?
もうすんなよっ！ 	 Ye had enough!?
税関はどこだ… 	 Would one of ye shut yer yap and grab that door?
積荷検査の待ち時間は？ 	 Who must I speak with to have my ship unquarantined?
税率高いのう… 	 How much is the tariff for sun lemons, woman?
うりゃぁぁぁ！ 	 You'll pay for that!
ひゅーひゅー 	 Look at the lovebirds!
いいぞハハハーッ 	 Kiss an' be done with it!
ほら来いや！ 	 I tried, but yer ma said it was on the house!
やれやれ！ 	 Gah hah hah hah hah!
サカナ～サカナだよ～ 	 Fruits of the Navigator's loins! Straight from the depths of Her salty womb!
網倉はっと… 	 O Llymlaen! See me safe to Fisherman's Bottom!
姉ちゃん10匹 	 Give me ten! No, twenty!
おすすめは？ 	 Uh...I think I'll pass.
どれにしよっかな… 	 Mmm... Loinfruit...
わしは、獣人商人と積極的に取引しておる。 故郷のウルダハでは獣人は忌み嫌われておるが、 ここでは自由に取引できるからな。 - マムージャ族は、 西方の新大陸出身の屈強な民だ。 奴らの商品は己自身、つまり傭兵ということだ。 - ゴブリン族が背負う大きな背嚢の中身は たいていガラクタだが、たまに掘り出し物がある。 宝石や鉱石が欲しいなら、キキルン族が頼りになるぞ。 	 I was most pleased to discover the attitude of acceptance towards beastman traders here in Limsa Lominsa. My fellow Ul'dahn merchants openly despise such savage peddlers, you see, but I believe there are opportunities being missed. - The Mamool Ja, for example, are a hardy race that hail from the lands to the west, and their skill at arms is their primary export. A quality source of mercenaries, if you ask me. - The bulging packs of the goblins? They often contain naught of value, but it is worth sifting through the junk for that one rare treasure. And the Qiqirn? Look no further should you wish to trade for ore or gemstones.
いい釣竿だなぁ 	 That's a fine rod. A fine rod, indeed.
こりゃ珍しい… 	 That's quite the price for a mere three bags.
どうするの～？ 	 That's what all my customers tell me.
さっすが～あははは 	 Ye'd both do better back in the guild polishin' yer masts! Hah hah hah!
♪ヨホホィ酒飲め船漕げ♪ 	 The decks, they be stained with the blood o' more men than there be in all o' Limsa.
♪ヨホホィ俺たちゃ海賊♪ 	 We may be pirates, but we ain't uncivilized.
釣り上手じゃのぅ 	 I just catch the fish and leave the mongerin' to her.
サカナ買わない？ 	 Greetin's, love. Aught I can interest you in?
ここから上甲板層だ 	 The upper decks lie above.
じゃあ5匹…全部だ！ 	 Might be there is. But it ain't fishes.
きゅいんきゅいん 	 <yip> <yip> <yip>
用意はいいか？ 	 Focus, my pet...
負けるかッ！ 	 Shining Emerald! I said Shining Emerald!
行くぞッ！ 	 Attack!
よく食うブタだな 	 Ye'd probably et yer own ma if we cooked the hag.
クンクン 	 <sniff> <sniff>
ここは総合タワー「ミズンマスト」の最下層、 防御施設「ブルワークホール」だ。 - 「ブルワーク」ってのは、 船のフチにある波よけの鋼板のことさ。 ここは敵という波を食い止める、最後の砦ってことさ。 	 This is Bulwark Hall, the lowest level of the Mizzenmast. In case you aren't familiar with the nautical term, a bulwark is the plating that prevents waves from swamping a ship's decks.  - Replace “waves” with “hordes of howling beastmen,” and you'll get an idea of the purpose for which this chamber exists.
この先は海都「リムサ・ロミンサ」の主門、 「ゼファー陸門 (りくもん)」さ。 そこをくぐれば、中央ラノシアへ出るぞ。 - ここらは、ゼファーと呼ばれる 穏やかな西風が心地よく吹く場所だからね。 「ゼファー・ドリフト」と呼ばれているよ。 	 Beyond the great Zephyr Gate of Limsa Lominsa lie the midlands of La Noscea. - The gentle wind that passes through the gate is said to be the sweet breath of the gods, carrying life and fortune.
俺は、外洋交易船「オライオン号」の船長アルドスキフ。 雇われ船長を続けて、早うんじゅうねん…… もう雇われ船長としては、ベテランといえるな。 - いざ船を買うほどの金がたまったところで、霊災だ…… さすがに、船主の船を奪うような形は気が引けてな。 未だに、船主のためにがんばってるのさ。 	 I'm the hired captain of the Orion. She's a fine vessel, true, but a hired captain can love his ship only as much as a paid bride can love her betrothed. - A ship of my own is all I've ever wanted. Was a gil away from buying one when the Calamity struck, but how can I complain when so many lost so much more?
ツツクな！　ツツクな！　ぷるぷる揺れる！！ 三歩さがって　ハナレテ見てろ！ 	 Hey, don't touch! I don't want no adventurer stink on my lovely mucus!
私の名は、ピーター・ウィンソム。 海都の人気情報誌「ハーバーヘラルド」の記者です。 - うちの「ハーバーヘラルド」は、 旬の話題を集めたリムサ・ロミンサの情報誌。 冒険者さんの魔物討伐の感想を、面白い記事にしますよ！ 	 Greetings, friend. I am Petyr Winsome, reporter for the Harbor Herald.  - You won't find a more reliable source of information anywhere else in Limsa Lominsa. Entrust your tales of adventure to me, and I'll see them faithfully incorporated into a front-page article!
腕がなるね 	 I need me some new stabbers...
次の仕事は… 	 What's our next job?
イシュガルド防衛への参戦を呼びかけているけど、 ここ海都じゃ、クルザスは遠い異国……。 なかなか募兵は進んでいないわ。 	 I have had little success in recruiting soldiers for Ishgard's war. Few Lominsans care for the troubles of distant Coerthas...
次こそ！ 	 We'll beat it this time!
今度はキメるわ！ 	 Onwards to victory...with style!
ああ…ハルオーネちゃん 	 Ah, my beloved Halone...
えっ、私が連れてるミニオンが気になるって？ だったら、ウルダハに行ってみるといいわよ。 きっと、手がかりが見つかるはずだから。 	 Isn't he positively adorable? ...What is he, you ask? Erm, well, judging by the crescent moon and his ice blue armor, I think he's supposed to be a guardian of Menphina or some such?
荒野に森林、雪山……いろんなところで踊ってきたよね。 これからも、新たな環境、新たな観客相手に、 とことん踊って、精進していくよ！ 	 I've danced in deserts beneath the burning sun, in lush forests, atop snow-swept peaks... I can't wait to see where my journey will take me next!
いつまでも、あなたに頼ってはいられないものね。 まず目下の問題として、人手不足を解消しなくっちゃ。 ラミンにも手を貸してもらって、有望な新人探しよ！ 	 I have relied on your kindness and talent for far too long already. And so I intend to scout out new dancers who can help shoulder the burden. Perhaps Lhaminn could introduce me to someone...?
花火を見てる奴ら いい顔してたな 	 Reckon folks were smilin' more'n ever this year!
